5       The Many Variables & The Spurious Waffles



     One of the most reliable sources of waffles in North America, if not the entire world, is
a Waffle House diner. Waffle House is nearly always open, even just after a hurricane. Most
diners invest in disaster preparedness, including having their own electrical generators. As a
consequence, the United States’ disaster relief agency (FEMA) informally uses Waffle House
as an index of disaster severity.79 If the Waffle House is closed, that’s a serious event.
     It is ironic then that steadfast Waffle House is associated with the nation’s highest divorce
rates (Figure 5.1). States with many Waffle Houses per person, like Georgia and Alabama,
also have some of the highest divorce rates in the United States. The lowest divorce rates are
found where there are zero Waffle Houses. Could always-available waffles and hash brown
potatoes put marriage at risk?
     Probably not. This is an example of a misleading correlation. No one thinks there is any
plausible mechanism by which Waffle House diners make divorce more likely. Instead, when
we see a correlation of this kind, we immediately start asking about other variables that are
really driving the relationship between waffles and divorce. In this case, Waffle House began
in Georgia in the year 1955. Over time, the diners spread across the Southern United States,
remaining largely within it. So Waffle House is associated with the South. Divorce is not a
uniquely Southern institution, but the Southern United States has some of the highest divorce
rates in the nation. So it’s probably just an accident of history that Waffle House and high
divorce rates both occur in the South.
     Such accidents are commonplace. It is not surprising that Waffle House is correlated
with divorce, because correlation in general is not surprising. In large data sets, every pair
of variables has a statistically discernible non-zero correlation.80 But since most correlations
do not indicate causal relationships, we need tools for distinguishing mere association from
evidence of causation. This is why so much effort is devoted to multiple regression, using
more than one predictor variable to simultaneously model an outcome. Reasons given for
multiple regression models include:
     (1) Statistical “control” for confounds. A confound is something that misleads us about
         a causal influence—there will be a more precise definition in the next chapter. The
         spurious waffles and divorce correlation is one type of confound, where southern-
         ness makes a variable with no real importance (Waffle House density) appear to
         be important. But confounds are diverse. They can hide important effects just as
         easily as they can produce false ones.
     (2) Multiple and complex causation. A phenomenon may arise from multiple simul-
         taneous causes, and causes can cascade in complex ways. And since one cause can
         hide another, they must be measured simultaneously.


                                               123
124                                    5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES




       14                       AR
                  ME                                        Figure 5.1. The number of Waffle House
                                       AL
                           OK
                                                            diners per million people is associated with
 Divorce rate
                                                  GA        divorce rate (in the year 2009) within the
                                                            United States. Each point is a State. “South-

8    10     12
                                                            ern” (former Confederate) States shown in
                                            SC              blue. Shaded region is 89% percentile in-
                                                            terval of the mean.     These data are in
       6              NJ                                    data(WaffleDivorce) in the rethinking
                                                            package.
                  0         10     20    30     40     50
                           Waffle Houses per million



                 (3) Interactions. The importance of one variable may depend upon another. For ex-
                     ample, plants benefit from both light and water. But in the absence of either, the
                     other is no benefit at all. Such interactions occur very often. Effective inference
                     about one variable will often depend upon consideration of others.
     In this chapter, we begin to deal with the first of these two, using multiple regression to
deal with simple confounds and to take multiple measurements of association. You’ll see how
to include any arbitrary number of main effects in your linear model of the Gaussian mean.
These main effects are additive combinations of variables, the simplest type of multiple vari-
able model. We’ll focus on two valuable things these models can help us with: (1) revealing
spurious correlations like the Waffle House correlation with divorce and (2) revealing impor-
tant correlations that may be masked by unrevealed correlations with other variables. Along
the way, you’ll meet categorical variables, which require special handling compared
to continuous variables.
     However, multiple regression can be worse than useless, if we don’t know how to use
it. Just adding variables to a model can do a lot of damage. In this chapter, we’ll begin to
think formally about causal inference and introduce graphical causal models as a way to
design and interpret regression models. The next chapter continues on this theme, describing
some serious and common dangers of adding predictor variables, ending with a unifying
framework for understanding the examples in both this chapter and the next.

Rethinking: Causal inference. Despite its central importance, there is no unified approach to causal
inference yet in the sciences. There are even people who argue that cause does not really exist; it’s just
a psychological illusion.81 And in complex dynamical systems, everything seems to cause everything
else. “Cause” loses intuitive value. About one thing, however, there is general agreement: Causal
inference always depends upon unverifiable assumptions. Another way to say this is that it’s always
possible to imagine some way in which your inference about cause is mistaken, no matter how careful
the design or analysis. A lot can be accomplished, despite this barrier.82
                                                 5.1. SPURIOUS ASSOCIATION                                        125




                 13                                                          13




  Divorce rate                                                Divorce rate
                 10                                                          10




                 6                                                           6

                      13          20                  30                          23         26              29
                                 Marriage rate                                         Median age marriage

                      Figure 5.2. Divorce rate is associated with both marriage rate (left) and
                      median age at marriage (right). Both predictor variables are standardized in
                      this example. The average marriage rate across States is 20 per 1000 adults,
                      and the average median age at marriage is 26 years.



                                             5.1. Spurious association
    Let’s leave waffles behind, at least for the moment. An example that is easier to under-
stand is the correlation between divorce rate and marriage rate (Figure 5.2). The rate at
which adults marry is a great predictor of divorce rate, as seen in the left-hand plot in the
figure. But does marriage cause divorce? In a trivial sense it obviously does: One cannot get
a divorce without first getting married. But there’s no reason high marriage rate must cause
more divorce. It’s easy to imagine high marriage rate indicating high cultural valuation of
marriage and therefore being associated with low divorce rate.
    Another predictor associated with divorce is the median age at marriage, displayed in
the right-hand plot in Figure 5.2. Age at marriage is also a good predictor of divorce rate—
higher age at marriage predicts less divorce. But there is no reason this has to be causal,
either, unless age at marriage is very late and the spouses do not live long enough to get a
divorce.
    Let’s load these data and standardize the variables of interest:

                                                                                                                        R code
# load data and copy
                                                                                                                        5.1
library(rethinking)
data(WaffleDivorce)
d <- WaffleDivorce

# standardize variables
d$D <- standardize( d$Divorce )
d$M <- standardize( d$Marriage )
d$A <- standardize( d$MedianAgeMarriage )
         126                     5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES



         You can replicate the right-hand plot in the figure using a linear regression model:

                                             Di ∼ Normal(µi , σ)
                                             µi = α + βA Ai
                                              α ∼ Normal(0, 0.2)
                                             βA ∼ Normal(0, 0.5)
                                              σ ∼ Exponential(1)

         Di is the standardized (zero centered, standard deviation one) divorce rate for State i, and
         Ai is State i’s standardized median age at marriage. The linear model structure should be
         familiar from the previous chapter.
              What about those priors? Since the outcome and the predictor are both standardized, the
         intercept α should end up very close to zero. What does the prior slope βA imply? If βA = 1,
         that would imply that a change of one standard deviation in age at marriage is associated
         likewise with a change of one standard deviation in divorce. To know whether or not that is
         a strong relationship, you need to know how big a standard deviation of age at marriage is:
R code
         sd( d$MedianAgeMarriage )
   5.2

         [1] 1.24363

         So when βA = 1, a change of 1.2 years in median age at marriage is associated with a full
         standard deviation change in the outcome variable. That seems like an insanely strong rela-
         tionship. The prior above thinks that only 5% of plausible slopes are more extreme than 1.
         We’ll simulate from these priors in a moment, so you can see how they look in the outcome
         space.
             To compute the approximate posterior, there are no new code tricks or techniques here.
         But I’ll add comments to help explain the mass of code to follow.
R code
         m5.1 <- quap(
   5.3
             alist(
                 D ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
                 mu <- a + bA * A ,
                 a ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.2 ) ,
                 bA ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
                 sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
             ) , data = d )


         To simulate from the priors, we can use extract.prior and link as in the previous chapter.
         I’ll plot the lines over the range of 2 standard deviations for both the outcome and predictor.
         That’ll cover most of the possible range of both variables.
R code
         set.seed(10)
   5.4
         prior <- extract.prior( m5.1 )
         mu <- link( m5.1 , post=prior , data=list( A=c(-2,2) ) )
         plot( NULL , xlim=c(-2,2) , ylim=c(-2,2) )
         for ( i in 1:50 ) lines( c(-2,2) , mu[i,] , col=col.alpha("black",0.4) )
                                                       5.1. SPURIOUS ASSOCIATION                             127




                     2




Divorce rate (std)
                     1

                                                                   Figure 5.3. Plausible regression lines implied
                     0                                             by the priors in m5.1. These are weakly infor-
                                                                   mative priors in that they allow some implusi-
                                                                   bly strong relationships but generally bound
                     -1                                            the lines to possible ranges of the variables.

                     -2

                          -2      -1       0       1        2
                               Median age marriage (std)


Figure 5.3 displays the result. You may wish to try some vaguer, flatter priors and see how
quickly the prior regression lines become ridiculous.
    Now for the posterior predictions. The procedure is exactly like the examples from the
previous chapter: link, then summarize with mean and PI, and then plot.
                                                                                                                    R code
# compute percentile interval of mean
                                                                                                                    5.5
A_seq <- seq( from=-3 , to=3.2 , length.out=30 )
mu <- link( m5.1 , data=list(A=A_seq) )
mu.mean <- apply( mu , 2, mean )
mu.PI <- apply( mu , 2 , PI )

# plot it all
plot( D ~ A , data=d , col=rangi2 )
lines( A_seq , mu.mean , lwd=2 )
shade( mu.PI , A_seq )


If you inspect the precis output, you’ll see that posterior for βA is reliably negative, as seen
in Figure 5.2.
     You can fit a similar regression for the relationship in the left-hand plot:
                                                                                                                    R code
m5.2 <- quap(
                                                                                                                    5.6
    alist(
        D ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
        mu <- a + bM * M ,
        a ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.2 ) ,
        bM ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
        sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
    ) , data = d )


As you can see in the figure, this relationship isn’t as strong as the previous one.
    But merely comparing parameter means between different bivariate regressions is no
way to decide which predictor is better. Both of these predictors could provide independent
value, or they could be redundant, or one could eliminate the value of the other.
128                     5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES



    To make sense of this, we’re going to have to think causally. And then, only after we’ve
done some thinking, a bigger regression model that includes both age at marriage and mar-
riage rate will help us.

5.1.1. Think before you regress. There are three observed variables in play: divorce rate
(D), marriage rate (M), and the median age at marriage (A) in each State. The pattern we
see in the previous two models and illustrated in Figure 5.2 is symptomatic of a situation in
which only one of the predictor variables, A in this case, has a causal impact on the outcome,
D, even though both predictor variables are strongly associated with the outcome.
     To understand this better, it is helpful to introduce a particular type of causal graph
known as a DAG, short for directed acyclic graph. Graph means it is nodes and con-
nections. Directed means the connections have arrows that indicate directions of causal in-
fluence. And acyclic means that causes do not eventually flow back on themselves. A DAG
is a way of describing qualitative causal relationships among variables. It isn’t as detailed as
a full model description, but it contains information that a purely statistical model does not.
Unlike a statistical model, a DAG will tell you the consequences of intervening to change a
variable. But only if the DAG is correct. There is no inference without assumption.
     The full framework for using DAGs to design and critique statistical models is compli-
cated. So instead of smothering you in the whole framework right now, I’ll build it up one
example at a time. By the end of the next chapter, you’ll have a set of simple rules that let
you accomplish quite a lot of criticism. And then other applications will be introduced in
later chapters.
     Let’s start with the basics. Here is a possible DAG for our divorce rate example:
                                    A                     M




                                               D

If you want to see the code to draw this, see the Overthinking box at the end of this section. It
may not look like much, but this type of diagram does a lot of work. It represents a heuristic
causal model. Like other models, it is an analytical assumption. The symbols A, M, and D
are our observed variables. The arrows show directions of influence. What this DAG says is:
      (1) A directly influences D
      (2) M directly influences D
      (3) A directly influences M
These statements can then have further implications. In this case, age of marriage influences
divorce in two ways. First it has a direct effect, A → D. Perhaps a direct effect would arise
because younger people change faster than older people and are therefore more likely to grow
incompatible with a partner. Second, it has an indirect effect by influencing the marriage rate,
which then influences divorce, A → M → D. If people get married earlier, then the marriage
rate may rise, because there are more young people. Consider for example if an evil dictator
forced everyone to marry at age 65. Since a smaller fraction of the population lives to 65 than
to 25, forcing delayed marriage will also reduce the marriage rate. If marriage rate itself has
any direct effect on divorce, maybe by making marriage more or less normative, then some
of that direct effect could be the indirect effect of age at marriage.
                                     5.1. SPURIOUS ASSOCIATION                                    129



    To infer the strength of these different arrows, we need more than one statistical model.
Model m5.1, the regression of D on A, tells us only that the total influence of age at marriage is
strongly negative with divorce rate. The “total” here means we have to account for every path
from A to D. There are two such paths in this graph: A → D, a direct path, and A → M → D,
an indirect path. In general, it is possible that a variable like A has no direct effect at all on an
outcome like D. It could still be associated with D entirely through the indirect path. That
type of relationship is known as mediation, and we’ll have another example later.
    As you’ll see however, the indirect path does almost no work in this case. How can we
show that? We know from m5.2 that marriage rate is positively associated with divorce rate.
But that isn’t enough to tell us that the path M → D is positive. It could be that the association
between M and D arises entirely from A’s influence on both M and D. Like this:

                                      A                      M




                                                 D

This DAG is also consistent with the posterior distributions of models m5.1 and m5.2. Why?
Because both M and D “listen” to A. They have information from A. So when you inspect
the association between D and M, you pick up that common information that they both got
from listening to A. You’ll see a more formal way to deduce this, in the next chapter.
    So which is it? Is there a direct effect of marriage rate, or rather is age at marriage just
driving both, creating a spurious correlation between marriage rate and divorce rate? To find
out, we need to consider carefully what each DAG implies. That’s what’s next.

Rethinking: What’s a cause? Questions of causation can become bogged down in philosophical
debates. These debates are worth having. But they don’t usually intersect with statistical concerns.
Knowing a cause in statistics means being able to correctly predict the consequences of an interven-
tion. There are contexts in which even this is complicated. For example, it isn’t possible to directly
change someone’s body weight. Changing someone’s body weight would mean intervening on an-
other variable, like diet, and that variable would have other causal effects in addition. But being
underweight can still be a legitimate cause of disease, even when we can’t intervene on it directly.



Overthinking: Drawing a DAG. There are several packages for drawing and analyzing DAGs. In this
book, we’ll use dagitty. It is both an R package and something you can use in your internet browser:
http://www.dagitty.net/. To draw the simple DAG you saw earlier in this section:

                                                                                                         R code
library(dagitty)                                                                                         5.7
dag5.1 <- dagitty( "dag{ A -> D; A -> M; M -> D }" )
coordinates(dag5.1) <- list( x=c(A=0,D=1,M=2) , y=c(A=0,D=1,M=0) )
drawdag( dag5.1 )



The -> arrows in the DAG definition indicate directions of influence. The coordinates function lets
you arrange the plot as you like.
130                       5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES



5.1.2. Testable implications. How do we use data to compare multiple, plausible causal
models? The first thing to consider is the testable implications of each model. Con-
sider the two DAGs we have so far considered:
                      A                     M      A                     M




                                 D                            D

Any DAG may imply that some variables are independent of others under certain condi-
tions. These are the model’s testable implications, its conditional independencies. Con-
ditional independencies come in two forms. First, they are statements of which variables
should be associated with one another (or not) in the data. Second, they are statements of
which variables become dis-associated when we condition on some other set of variables.
     What does “conditioning” mean? Informally, conditioning on a variable Z means learn-
ing its value and then asking if X adds any additional information about Y. If learning X
doesn’t give you any more information about Y, then we might say that Y is independent of
X conditional on Z. This conditioning statement is sometimes written as: Y ⊥⊥ X|Z. This
is very weird notation and any feelings of annoyance on your part are justified. We’ll work
with this concept a lot, so don’t worry if it doesn’t entirely make sense right now. You’ll see
examples very soon.
     Let’s consider conditional independence in the context of the divorce example. What are
the conditional independencies of the DAGs at the top of the page? How do we derive these
conditional independencies? Finding conditional independencies is not hard, but also not
at all obvious. With a little practice, it becomes very easy. The more general rules can wait
until the next chapter. For now, let’s consider each DAG in turn and inspect the possibilities.
     For the DAG on the left above, the one with three arrows, first note that every pair of
variables is correlated. This is because there is a causal arrow between every pair. These
arrows create correlations. So before we condition on anything, everything is associated
with everything else. This is already a testable implication. We could write it:
                                D ̸⊥⊥ A     D ̸⊥⊥ M       A ̸⊥⊥ M
That ̸⊥⊥ thing means “not independent of.” If we now look in the data and find that any pair of
variables are not associated, then something is wrong with the DAG (assuming the data are
correct). In these data, all three pairs are in fact strongly associated. Check for yourself. You
can use cor to measure simple correlations. Correlations are sometimes terrible measures of
association—many different patterns of association with different implications can produce
the same correlation. But they do honest work in this case.
    Are there any other testable implications for the first DAG above? No. It will be easier to
see why, if we slide over to consider the second DAG, the one in which M has no influence
on D. In this DAG, it is still true that all three variables are associated with one another. A is
associated with D and M because it influences them both. And D and M are associated with
one another, because M influences them both. They share a cause, and this leads them to be
correlated with one another through that cause. But suppose we condition on A. All of the
information in M that is relevant to predicting D is in A. So once we’ve conditioned on A,
M tells us nothing more about D. So in the second DAG, a testable implication is that D is
independent of M, conditional on A. In other words, D ⊥⊥ M|A. The same thing does not
                                      5.1. SPURIOUS ASSOCIATION                                       131



happen with the first DAG. Conditioning on A does not make D independent of M, because
M really influences D all by itself in this model.
    In the next chapter, I’ll show you the general rules for deducing these implications. For
now, the dagitty package has the rules built in and can find the implications for you. Here’s
the code to define the second DAG and display the implied conditional independencies.
                                                                                                             R code
DMA_dag2 <- dagitty('dag{ D <- A -> M }')
                                                                                                             5.8
impliedConditionalIndependencies( DMA_dag2 )


D _||_ M | A
The first DAG has no conditional independencies. You can define it and check with this:
                                                                                                             R code
DMA_dag1 <- dagitty('dag{ D <- A -> M -> D }')
                                                                                                             5.9
impliedConditionalIndependencies( DMA_dag1 )


There are no conditional independencies, so there is no output to display.
     Let’s try to summarize. The testable implications of the first DAG are that all pairs of vari-
ables should be associated, whatever we condition on. The testable implications of the second
DAG are that all pairs of variables should be associated, before conditioning on anything, but
that D and M should be independent after conditioning on A. So the only implication that
differs between these DAGs is the last one: D ⊥⊥ M|A.
     To test this implication, we need a statistical model that conditions on A, so we can see
whether that renders D independent of M. And that is what multiple regression helps with.
It can address a useful descriptive question:
          Is there any additional value in knowing a variable, once I already know all of
          the other predictor variables?
So for example once you fit a multiple regression to predict divorce using both marriage rate
and age at marriage, the model addresses the questions:
      (1) After I already know marriage rate, what additional value is there in also knowing
            age at marriage?
      (2) After I already know age at marriage, what additional value is there in also knowing
            marriage rate?
The parameter estimates corresponding to each predictor are the (often opaque) answers to
these questions. The questions above are descriptive, and the answers are also descriptive. It
is only the derivation of the testable implications above that gives these descriptive results a
causal meaning. But that meaning is still dependent upon believing the DAG.

Rethinking: “Control” is out of control. Very often, the question just above is spoken of as “statisti-
cal control,” as in controlling for the effect of one variable while estimating the effect of another. But
this is sloppy language, as it implies too much. Statistical control is quite different from experimental
control, as we’ll explore more in the next chapter. The point here isn’t to police language. Instead, the
point is to observe the distinction between small world and large world interpretations. Since most
people who use statistics are not statisticians, sloppy language like “control” can promote a sloppy
culture of interpretation. Such cultures tend to overestimate the power of statistical methods, so re-
sisting them can be difficult. Disciplining your own language may be enough. Disciplining another’s
language is hard to do, without seeming like a fastidious scold, as this very box must seem.
132                       5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES



5.1.3. Multiple regression notation. Multiple regression formulas look a lot like the poly-
nomial models at the end of the previous chapter—they add more parameters and variables
to the definition of µi . The strategy is straightforward:
      (1) Nominate the predictor variables you want in the linear model of the mean.
      (2) For each predictor, make a parameter that will measure its conditional association
          with the outcome.
      (3) Multiply the parameter by the variable and add that term to the linear model.
Examples are always necessary, so here is the model that predicts divorce rate, using both
marriage rate and age at marriage.

                                      Di ∼ Normal(µi , σ)                            [probability of data]
                                      µi = α + βM Mi + βA Ai                               [linear model]

                                       α ∼ Normal(0, 0.2)                                    [prior for α]

                                     βM ∼ Normal(0, 0.5)                                   [prior for βM ]

                                     βA ∼ Normal(0, 0.5)                                    [prior for βA ]

                                       σ ∼ Exponential(1)                                    [prior for σ ]


You can use whatever symbols you like for the parameters and variables, but here I’ve chosen
R for marriage rate and A for age at marriage, reusing these symbols as subscripts for the
corresponding parameters. But feel free to use whichever symbols reduce the load on your
own memory.
    So what does it mean to assume µi = α + βM Mi + βA Ai ? Mechanically, it means that the
expected outcome for any State with marriage rate Mi and median age at marriage Ai is the
sum of three independent terms. If you are like most people, this is still pretty mysterious.
The mechanical meaning of the equation doesn’t map onto a unique causal meaning. Let’s
take care of the mechanical bits first, before returning to interpretation.

Overthinking: Compact notation and the design matrix. Often, linear models are written using a
compact form like:
                                              Xn
                                    µi = α +     βj xji
                                                     j=1

where j is an index over predictor variables and n is the number of predictor variables. This may be
read as the mean is modeled as the sum of an intercept and an additive combination of the products of
parameters and predictors. Even more compactly, using matrix notation:
                                               m = Xb
where m is a vector of predicted means, one for each row in the data, b is a (column) vector of param-
eters, one for each predictor variable, and X is a matrix. This matrix is called a design matrix. It has
as many rows as the data, and as many columns as there are predictors plus one. So X is basically a
data frame, but with an extra first column. The extra column is filled with 1s. These 1s are multiplied
by the first parameter, which is the intercept, and so return the unmodified intercept. When X is
matrix-multiplied by b, you get the predicted means. In R notation, this operation is X %*% b.
     We’re not going to use the design matrix approach. But it’s good to recognize it, and sometimes
it can save you a lot of work. For example, for linear regressions, there is a nice matrix formula for
the maximum likelihood (or least squares) estimates. Most statistical software exploits that formula.
                                   5.1. SPURIOUS ASSOCIATION                                 133



5.1.4. Approximating the posterior. To fit this model to the divorce data, we just expand
the linear model. Here’s the model definition again, with the code on the right-hand side:
                      Di ∼ Normal(µi , σ)                               D ~ dnorm(mu,sigma)
                      µi = α + βM Mi + βA Ai                          mu <- a + bM*M + bA*A
                       α ∼ Normal(0, 0.2)                                    a ~ dnorm(0,0.2)
                     βM ∼ Normal(0, 0.5)                                    bM ~ dnorm(0,0.5)
                      βA ∼ Normal(0, 0.5)                                   bA ~ dnorm(0,0.5)
                       σ ∼ Exponential(1)                                     sigma ~ dexp(1)

And here is the quap code to approximate the posterior distribution:
                                                                                                   R code
m5.3 <- quap(
                                                                                                   5.10
    alist(
        D ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
        mu <- a + bM*M + bA*A ,
        a ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.2 ) ,
        bM ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
        bA ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
        sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
    ) , data = d )
precis( m5.3 )


      mean   sd 5.5% 94.5%
a     0.00 0.10 -0.16 0.16
bM   -0.07 0.15 -0.31 0.18
bA   -0.61 0.15 -0.85 -0.37
sigma 0.79 0.08 0.66 0.91
The posterior mean for marriage rate, bM, is now close to zero, with plenty of probability
of both sides of zero. The posterior mean for age at marriage, bA, is essentially unchanged.
It will help to visualize the posterior distributions for all three models, focusing just on the
slope parameters βA and βM :
                                                                                                   R code
plot( coeftab(m5.1,m5.2,m5.3), par=c("bA","bM") )
                                                                                                   5.11


                     bA
                       m5.3
                       m5.2
                       m5.1

                     bM
                       m5.3
                       m5.2
                       m5.1

                                         -0.5           0.0           0.5
                                                 Estimate

The posterior means are shown by the points and the 89% compatibility intervals by the
solid horizontal lines. Notice how bA doesn’t move, only grows a bit more uncertain, while
         134                       5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES



         bM is only associated with divorce when age at marriage is missing from the model. You can
         interpret these distributions as saying:
                  Once we know median age at marriage for a State, there is little or no addi-
                  tional predictive power in also knowing the rate of marriage in that State.
         In that weird notation, D ⊥⊥ M|A. This tests the implication of the second DAG from earlier.
         Since the first DAG did not imply this result, it is out.
              Note that this does not mean that there is no value in knowing marriage rate. Consistent
         with the earlier DAG, if you didn’t have access to age-at-marriage data, then you’d definitely
         find value in knowing the marriage rate. M is predictive but not causal. Assuming there
         are no other causal variables missing from the model (more on that in the next chapter),
         this implies there is no important direct causal path from marriage rate to divorce rate. The
         association between marriage rate and divorce rate is spurious, caused by the influence of age
         of marriage on both marriage rate and divorce rate. I’ll leave it to the reader to investigate
         the relationship between age at marriage, A, and marriage rate, M, to complete the picture.
              But how did model m5.3 achieve the inference that marriage rate adds no additional
         information, once we know age at marriage? Let’s draw some pictures.

         Overthinking: Simulating the divorce example. The divorce data are real data. See the sources in
         ?WaffleDivorce. But it is useful to simulate the kind of causal relationships shown in the previous
         DAG: M ← A → D. Every DAG implies a simulation, and such simulations can help us design
         models to correctly infer relationships among variables. In this case, you just need to simulate each
         of the three variables:
R code
 5.12    N <- 50 # number of simulated States
         age <- rnorm( N )        # sim A
         mar <- rnorm( N , -age ) # sim A -> M
         div <- rnorm( N , age ) # sim A -> D


         Now if you use these variables in models m5.1, m5.2, and m5.3, you’ll see the same pattern of posterior
         inferences. It is also possible to simulate that both A and M influence D: div <- rnorm(N, age +
         mar ). In that case, a naive regression of D on A will overestimate the influence of A, just like a
         naive regression of D on M will overestimate the importance of M. The multiple regression will help
         sort things out for you in this situation as well. But interpreting the parameter estimates will always
         depend upon what you believe about the causal model, because typically several (or very many) causal
         models are consistent with any one set of parameter estimates. We’ll discuss this later in the chapter
         as Markov equivalence.


         5.1.5. Plotting multivariate posteriors. Let’s pause for a moment, before moving on. There
         are a lot of moving parts here: three variables, some strange DAGs, and three models. If you
         feel at all confused, it is only because you are paying attention.
              It will help to visualize the model’s inferences. Visualizing the posterior distribution
         in simple bivariate regressions, like those in the previous chapter, is easy. There’s only one
         predictor variable, so a single scatterplot can convey a lot of information. And so in the
         previous chapter we used scatters of the data. Then we overlaid regression lines and intervals
         to both (1) visualize the size of the association between the predictor and outcome and (2)
         to get a crude sense of the ability of the model to predict the individual observations.
              With multivariate regression, you’ll need more plots. There is a huge literature detail-
         ing a variety of plotting techniques that all attempt to help one understand multiple linear
                                   5.1. SPURIOUS ASSOCIATION                                  135



regression. None of these techniques is suitable for all jobs, and most do not generalize be-
yond linear regression. So the approach I take here is to instead help you compute whatever
you need from the model. I offer three examples of interpretive plots:
     (1) Predictor residual plots. These plots show the outcome against residual predictor
         values. They are useful for understanding the statistical model, but not much else.
     (2) Posterior prediction plots. These show model-based predictions against raw data,
         or otherwise display the error in prediction. They are tools for checking fit and
         assessing predictions. They are not causal tools.
     (3) Counterfactual plots. These show the implied predictions for imaginary experi-
         ments. These plots allow you to explore the causal implications of manipulating
         one or more variables.
Each of these plot types has its advantages and deficiencies, depending upon the context and
the question of interest. In the rest of this section, I show you how to manufacture each of
these in the context of the divorce data.

    5.1.5.1. Predictor residual plots. A predictor residual is the average prediction error when
we use all of the other predictor variables to model a predictor of interest. That’s a compli-
cated concept, so we’ll go straight to the example, where it will make sense. The benefit of
computing these things is that, once plotted against the outcome, we have a bivariate regres-
sion that has already conditioned on all of the other predictor variables. It leaves the variation
that is not expected by the model of the mean, µ, as a function of the other predictors.
    In our model of divorce rate, we have two predictors: (1) marriage rate M and (2) median
age at marriage A. To compute predictor residuals for either, we just use the other predictor
to model it. So for marriage rate, this is the model we need:

                                     Mi ∼ Normal(µi , σ)
                                     µi = α + βAi
                                      α ∼ Normal(0, 0.2)
                                      β ∼ Normal(0, 0.5)
                                      σ ∼ Exponential(1)

As before, M is marriage rate and A is median age at marriage. Note that since we standard-
ized both variables, we already expect the mean α to be around zero, as before. So I’m reusing
the same priors as earlier. This code will approximate the posterior:
                                                                                                     R code
m5.4 <- quap(
                                                                                                     5.13
    alist(
        M ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
        mu <- a + bAM * A ,
        a ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.2 ) ,
        bAM ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
        sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
    ) , data = d )


And then we compute the residuals by subtracting the observed marriage rate in each State
from the predicted rate, based upon the model above:
         136                                                      5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES




                                                WY                                                                        3                    DC


                                 2                        ND                                                              2




           Marriage rate (std)                                                                    Age at marriage (std)
                                                                        HI
                                 1                                                                                        1                                   HI


                                                                                                                          0
                                 0

                                                                                        DC                                -1
                                 -1
                                                                                                                          -2
                                                                 ME                                                                                           ID

                                        -2           -1           0          1     2          3                                          -1          0    1             2
                                                 Age at marriage (std)                                                                        Marriage rate (std)



                                 2                                                                                        2
                                         ME




           Divorce rate (std)                                                                     Divorce rate (std)
                                 1                                                                                        1

                                                                                       WY
                                 0                                                                                        0

                                                                                             HI                                                                    HI

                                 -1                                              ND                                       -1
                                                                                                                               ID
                                                                                       DC
                                                                                                                                                                                DC
                                 -2                                                                                       -2

                                      -1.5    -1.0        -0.5    0.0    0.5     1.0   1.5                                          -1           0        1                 2
                                               Marriage rate residuals                                                                   Age at marriage residuals

                                      Figure 5.4. Understanding multiple regression through residuals. The top
                                      row shows each predictor regressed on the other predictor. The lengths of
                                      the line segments connecting the model’s expected value of the outcome,
                                      the regression line, and the actual value are the residuals. In the bottom
                                      row, divorce rate is regressed on the residuals from the top row. Bottom left:
                                      Residual variation in marriage rate shows little association with divorce rate.
                                      Bottom right: Divorce rate on age at marriage residuals, showing remaining
                                      variation, and this variation is associated with divorce rate.


R code
         mu <- link(m5.4)
 5.14
         mu_mean <- apply( mu , 2 , mean )
         mu_resid <- d$M - mu_mean


         When a residual is positive, that means that the observed rate was in excess of what the model
         expects, given the median age at marriage in that State. When a residual is negative, that
         means the observed rate was below what the model expects. In simpler terms, States with
                                     5.1. SPURIOUS ASSOCIATION                                     137



positive residuals have high marriage rates for their median age of marriage, while States
with negative residuals have low rates for their median age of marriage. It’ll help to plot
the relationship between these two variables, and show the residuals as well. In Figure 5.4,
upper left, I show m5.4 along with line segments for each residual. Notice that the residuals
are variation in marriage rate that is left over, after taking out the purely linear relationship
between the two variables.
      Now to use these residuals, let’s put them on a horizontal axis and plot them against the
actual outcome of interest, divorce rate. In Figure 5.4 also (lower left), I plot these residuals
against divorce rate, overlaying the linear regression of the two variables. You can think of
this plot as displaying the linear relationship between divorce and marriage rates, having
conditioned already on median age of marriage. The vertical dashed line indicates marriage
rate that exactly matches the expectation from median age at marriage. So States to the right
of the line have higher marriage rates than expected. States to the left of the line have lower
rates. Average divorce rate on both sides of the line is about the same, and so the regression
line demonstrates little relationship between divorce and marriage rates.
      The same procedure works for the other predictor. The top right plot in Figure 5.4
shows the regression of A on M and the residuals. In the lower right, these residuals are used
to predict divorce rate. States to the right of the vertical dashed line have older-than-expected
median age at marriage, while those to the left have younger-than-expected median age at
marriage. Now we find that the average divorce rate on the right is lower than the rate on the
left, as indicated by the regression line. States in which people marry older than expected for
a given rate of marriage tend to have less divorce.
      So what’s the point of all of this? There’s conceptual value in seeing the model-based
predictions displayed against the outcome, after subtracting out the influence of other pre-
dictors. The plots in Figure 5.4 do this. But this procedure also brings home the message
that regression models measure the remaining association of each predictor with the out-
come, after already knowing the other predictors. In computing the predictor residual plots,
you had to perform those calculations yourself. In the unified multivariate model, it all hap-
pens automatically. Nevertheless, it is useful to keep this fact in mind, because regressions
can behave in surprising ways as a result. We’ll have an example soon.
      Linear regression models do all of this simultaneous measurement with a very specific
additive model of how the variables relate to one another. But predictor variables can be
related to one another in non-additive ways. The basic logic of statistical conditioning does
not change in those cases, but the details definitely do, and these residual plots cease to be
useful. Luckily there are other ways to understand a model. That’s where we turn next.

Rethinking: Residuals are parameters, not data. There is a tradition, especially in parts of biology,
of using residuals from one model as data in another model. For example, a biologist might regress
brain size on body size and then use the brain size residuals as data in another model. This procedure
is always a mistake. Residuals are not known. They are parameters, variables with unobserved values.
Treating them as known values throws away uncertainty. The right way to adjust for body size is to
include it in the same model,83 preferably a model designed in light of an explicit causal model.


    5.1.5.2. Posterior prediction plots. It’s important to check the model’s implied predic-
tions against the observed data. This is what you did in Chapter 3, when you simulated
globe tosses, averaging over the posterior, and comparing the simulated results to the ob-
served. These kinds of checks are useful in many ways. For now, we’ll focus on two uses.
         138                                        5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES




                                       ID
                                                   UT
                             1                                           Figure 5.5. Posterior predictive plot for the
                                                                         multivariate divorce model, m5.3. The hori-



         Predicted divorce
                                                                         zontal axis is the observed divorce rate in each
                             0                                    ME
                                                                         State. The vertical axis is the model’s posterior
                                                                         predicted divorce rate, given each State’s me-
                             -1                     RI                   dian age at marriage and marriage rate. The
                                                                         blue line segments are 89% compatibility inter-
                             -2
                                                                         vals. The diagonal line shows where posterior
                                                                         predictions exactly match the sample.
                                  -2        -1      0      1      2
                                             Observed divorce


              (1) Did the model correctly approximate the posterior distribution? Golems do make
                  mistakes, as do golem engineers. Errors can be more easily diagnosed by compar-
                  ing implied predictions to the raw data. Some caution is required, because not all
                  models try to exactly match the sample. But even then, you’ll know what to expect
                  from a successful approximation. You’ll see some examples later (Chapter 13).
              (2) How does the model fail? Models are useful fictions. So they always fail in some
                  way. Sometimes, a model fits correctly but is still so poor for our purposes that it
                  must be discarded. More often, a model predicts well in some respects, but not in
                  others. By inspecting the individual cases where the model makes poor predictions,
                  you might get an idea of how to improve it. The difficulty is that this process is
                  essentially creative and relies upon the analyst’s domain expertise. No robot can
                  (yet) do it for you. It also risks chasing noise, a topic we’ll focus on in later chapters.
             How could we produce a simple posterior predictive check in the divorce example? Let’s
         begin by simulating predictions, averaging over the posterior.
R code
         # call link without specifying new data
 5.15
         # so it uses original data
         mu <- link( m5.3 )

         # summarize samples across cases
         mu_mean <- apply( mu , 2 , mean )
         mu_PI <- apply( mu , 2 , PI )

         # simulate observations
         # again no new data, so uses original data
         D_sim <- sim( m5.3 , n=1e4 )
         D_PI <- apply( D_sim , 2 , PI )


         This code is similar to what you’ve seen before, but now using the original observed data.
              For multivariate models, there are many different ways to display these simulations. The
         simplest is to just plot predictions against observed. This code will do that, and then add a line
         to show perfect prediction and line segments for the confidence interval of each prediction:
                                       5.1. SPURIOUS ASSOCIATION                                       139




                                                                                                              R code
plot( mu_mean ~ d$D , col=rangi2 , ylim=range(mu_PI) ,
                                                                                                              5.16
    xlab="Observed divorce" , ylab="Predicted divorce" )
abline( a=0 , b=1 , lty=2 )
for ( i in 1:nrow(d) ) lines( rep(d$D[i],2) , mu_PI[,i] , col=rangi2 )


The resulting plot appears in Figure 5.5. It’s easy to see from this arrangement of the sim-
ulations that the model under-predicts for States with very high divorce rates while it over-
predicts for States with very low divorce rates. That’s normal. This is what regression does—it
is skeptical of extreme values, so it expects regression towards the mean. But beyond this gen-
eral regression to the mean, some States are very frustrating to the model, lying very far from
the diagonal. I’ve labeled some points like this, including Idaho (ID) and Utah (UT), both of
which have much lower divorce rates than the model expects them to have. The easiest way
to label a few select points is to use identify:
                                                                                                              R code
identify( x=d$D , y=mu_mean , labels=d$Loc )
                                                                                                              5.17

After executing the line of code above, R will wait for you to click near a point in the active
plot window. It’ll then place a label near that point, on the side you choose. When you are
done labeling points, press your right mouse button (or press esc, on some platforms).
    What is unusual about Idaho and Utah? Both of these States have large proportions of
members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Members of this church have
low rates of divorce, wherever they live. This suggests that having a finer view on the demo-
graphic composition of each State, beyond just median age at marriage, would help.

Rethinking: Stats, huh, yeah what is it good for? Often people want statistical modeling to do things
that statistical modeling cannot do. For example, we’d like to know whether an effect is “real” or rather
spurious. Unfortunately, modeling merely quantifies uncertainty in the precise way that the model
understands the problem. Usually answers to large world questions about truth and causation depend
upon information not included in the model. For example, any observed correlation between an out-
come and predictor could be eliminated or reversed once another predictor is added to the model.
But if we cannot think of the right variable, we might never notice. Therefore all statistical models are
vulnerable to and demand critique, regardless of the precision of their estimates and apparent accu-
racy of their predictions. Rounds of model criticism and revision embody the real tests of scientific
hypotheses. A true hypothesis will pass and fail many statistical “tests” on its way to acceptance.



Overthinking: Simulating spurious association. One way that spurious associations between a pre-
dictor and outcome can arise is when a truly causal predictor, call it xreal , influences both the outcome,
y, and a spurious predictor, xspur . This can be confusing, however, so it may help to simulate this sce-
nario and see both how the spurious data arise and prove to yourself that multiple regression can
reliably indicate the right predictor, xreal . So here’s a very basic simulation:
                                                                                                              R code
N <- 100                         # number of cases                                                            5.18
x_real <- rnorm( N )             # x_real as Gaussian with mean 0 and stddev 1
x_spur <- rnorm( N , x_real )    # x_spur as Gaussian with mean=x_real
y <- rnorm( N , x_real )         # y as Gaussian with mean=x_real
d <- data.frame(y,x_real,x_spur) # bind all together in data frame
140                       5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES



Now the data frame d has 100 simulated cases. Because x_real influences both y and x_spur, you
can think of x_spur as another outcome of x_real, but one which we mistake as a potential predictor
of y. As a result, both xreal and xspur are correlated with y. You can see this in the scatterplots from
pairs(d). But when you include both x variables in a linear regression predicting y, the posterior
mean for the association between y and xspur will be close to zero.


     5.1.5.3. Counterfactual plots. A second sort of inferential plot displays the causal impli-
cations of the model. I call these plots counterfactual, because they can be produced for
any values of the predictor variables you like, even unobserved combinations like very high
median age of marriage and very high marriage rate. There are no States with this combi-
nation, but in a counterfactual plot, you can ask the model for a prediction for such a State,
asking questions like “What would Utah’s divorce rate be, if it’s median age at marriage were
higher?” Used with clarity of purpose, counterfactual plots help you understand the model,
as well as generate predictions for imaginary interventions and compute how much some
observed outcome could be attributed to some cause.
     Note that the term “counterfactual” is highly overloaded in statistics and philosophy. It
hardly ever means the same thing when used by different authors. Here, I use it to indicate
some computation that makes use of the structural causal model, going beyond the posterior
distribution. But it could refer to questions about both the past and the future.
     The simplest use of a counterfactual plot is to see how the outcome would change as you
change one predictor at a time. If some predictor X took on a new value for one or more cases
in our data, how would the outcome Y have changed? Changing just one predictor X might
also change other predictors, depending upon the causal model. Suppose for example that
you pay young couples to postpone marriage until they are 35 years old. Surely this will also
decrease the number of couples who ever get married—some people will die before turning
35, among other reasons—decreasing the overall marriage rate. An extraordinary and evil
degree of control over people would be necessary to really hold marriage rate constant while
forcing everyone to marry at a later age.
     So let’s see how to generate plots of model predictions that take the causal structure into
account. The basic recipe is:
      (1) Pick a variable to manipulate, the intervention variable.
      (2) Define the range of values to set the intervention variable to.
      (3) For each value of the intervention variable, and for each sample in posterior, use
           the causal model to simulate the values of other variables, including the outcome.
In the end, you end up with a posterior distribution of counterfactual outcomes that you can
plot and summarize in various ways, depending upon your goal.
     Let’s see how to do this for the divorce model. Again we take this DAG as given:
                                       A                      M




                                                   D

To simulate from this, we need more than the DAG. We also need a set of functions that tell
us how each variable is generated. For simplicity, we’ll use Gaussian distributions for each
variable, just like in model m5.3. But model m5.3 ignored the assumption that A influences
                                 5.1. SPURIOUS ASSOCIATION                              141



M. We didn’t need that to estimate A → D. But we do need it to predict the consequences
of manipulating A, because some of the effect of A acts through M.
    To estimate the influence of A on M, all we need is to regress A on M. There are no
other variables in the DAG creating an association between A and M. We can just add this
regression to the quap model, running two regressions at the same time:
                                                                                              R code
data(WaffleDivorce)
                                                                                              5.19
d <- list()
d$A <- standardize( WaffleDivorce$MedianAgeMarriage )
d$D <- standardize( WaffleDivorce$Divorce )
d$M <- standardize( WaffleDivorce$Marriage )

m5.3_A <- quap(
    alist(
      ## A -> D <- M
        D ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
        mu <- a + bM*M + bA*A ,
        a ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.2 ) ,
        bM ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
        bA ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
        sigma ~ dexp( 1 ),
      ## A -> M
        M ~ dnorm( mu_M , sigma_M ),
        mu_M <- aM + bAM*A,
        aM ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.2 ),
        bAM ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ),
        sigma_M ~ dexp( 1 )
    ) , data = d )


Look at the precis(5.3_A) summary. You’ll see that M and A are strongly negatively asso-
ciated. If we interpret this causally, it indicates that manipulating A reduces M.
     The goal is to simulate what would happen, if we manipulate A. So next we define a
range of values for A.
                                                                                              R code
A_seq <- seq( from=-2 , to=2 , length.out=30 )
                                                                                              5.20

This defines a list of 30 imaginary interventions, ranging from 2 standard deviations below
and 2 above the mean. Now we can use sim, which you met in the previous chapter, to
simulate observations from model m5.3_A. But this time we’ll tell it to simulate both M and
D, in that order. Why in that order? Because we have to simulate the influence of A on M
before we simulate the joint influence of A and M on D. The vars argument to sim tells it
both which observables to simulate and in which order.
                                                                                              R code
# prep data
                                                                                              5.21
sim_dat <- data.frame( A=A_seq )

# simulate M and then D, using A_seq
s <- sim( m5.3_A , data=sim_dat , vars=c("M","D") )
         142                                        5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES




                                   Total counterfactual effect of A on D                                Counterfactual effect A -> M
                              2                                                               2



                              1                                                               1




           counterfactual D                                                counterfactual M
                              0                                                               0



                              -1                                                              -1



                              -2                                                              -2

                                   -2      -1         0         1     2                            -2       -1         0         1     2
                                                manipulated A                                                    manipulated A

                                   Figure 5.6. Counterfactual plots for the multivariate divorce model, m5.3.
                                   These plots visualize the predicted effect of manipulating age at marriage A
                                   on divorce rate D. Left: Total causal effect of manipulating A (horizontal)
                                   on D. This plot contains both paths, A → D and A → M → D. Right:
                                   Simulated values of M show the estimated influence A → M.


         That’s all there is to it. But do at least glance at the Overthinking box at the end of this
         section, where I show you the individual steps, so you can perform this kind of counterfactual
         simulation for any model fit with any software. Now to plot the predictions:
R code
         plot( sim_dat$A , colMeans(s$D) , ylim=c(-2,2) , type="l" ,
 5.22
             xlab="manipulated A" , ylab="counterfactual D" )
         shade( apply(s$D,2,PI) , sim_dat$A )
         mtext( "Total counterfactual effect of A on D" )


         The resulting plot is shown in Figure 5.6 (left side). This predicted trend in D includes both
         paths: A → D and A → M → D. We found previously that M → D is very small, so the
         second path doesn’t contribute much to the trend. But if M were to strongly influence D, the
         code above would include the effect. The counterfactual simulation also generated values for
         M. These are shown on the right in Figure 5.6. The object s from the code above includes
         these simulated M values. Try to reproduce the figure yourself.
             Of course these calculations also permit numerical summaries. For example, the ex-
         pected causal effect of increasing median age at marriage from 20 to 30 is:
R code
         # new data frame, standardized to mean 26.1 and std dev 1.24
 5.23
         sim2_dat <- data.frame( A=(c(20,30)-26.1)/1.24 )
         s2 <- sim( m5.3_A , data=sim2_dat , vars=c("M","D") )
         mean( s2$D[,2] - s2$D[,1] )


         [1] -4.591425

         This is a huge effect of four and one half standard deviations, probably impossibly large.
                                                         5.1. SPURIOUS ASSOCIATION                             143




                        Total counterfactual effect of M on D
                   2



                   1




counterfactual D
                                                                     Figure 5.7. The counterfactual effect of ma-
                                                                     nipulating marriage rate M on divorce rate D.
                   0
                                                                     Since M → D was estimated to be very small,
                                                                     there is no strong trend here. By manipulating
                   -1                                                M, we break the influence of A on M, and this
                                                                     removes the association between M and D.
                   -2

                        -2      -1         0         1        2
                                     manipulated M



    The trick with simulating counterfactuals is to realize that when we manipulate some
variable X, we break the causal influence of other variables on X. This is the same as saying
we modify the DAG so that no arrows enter X. Suppose for example that we now simulate
the effect of manipulating M. This implies the DAG:
                                                         A                     M



                                                                    D

The arrow A → M is deleted, because if we control the values of M, then A no longer influ-
ences it. It’s like a perfectly controlled experiment. Now we can modify the code above to
simulate the counterfactual result of manipulating M. We’ll simulate a counterfactual for an
average state, with A = 0, and see what changing M does.
                                                                                                                      R code
sim_dat <- data.frame( M=seq(from=-2,to=2,length.out=30) , A=0 )
                                                                                                                      5.24
s <- sim( m5.3_A , data=sim_dat , vars="D" )

plot( sim_dat$M , colMeans(s) , ylim=c(-2,2) , type="l" ,
    xlab="manipulated M" , ylab="counterfactual D" )
shade( apply(s,2,PI) , sim_dat$M )
mtext( "Total counterfactual effect of M on D" )


We only simulate D now—note the vars argument to sim() in the code above. We don’t
simulate A, because M doesn’t influence it. I show this plot in Figure 5.7. This trend is less
strong, because there is no evidence for a strong influence of M on D.
    In more complex models with many potential paths, the same strategy will compute
counterfactuals for an exposure of interest. But as you’ll see in later examples, often it is
simply not possible to estimate a plausible, un-confounded causal effect of some exposure
X on some outcome Y. But even in those cases, there are still important counterfactuals to
consider. So we’ll return to this theme in future chapters.
         144                       5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES




         Overthinking: Simulating counterfactuals. The example in this section used sim() to hide the de-
         tails. But simulating counterfactuals on your own is not hard. It just uses the model definition.
         Assume we’ve already fit model m5.3_A, the model that includes both causal paths A → D and
         A → M → D. We define a range of values that we want to assign to A:
R code
 5.25    A_seq <- seq( from=-2 , to=2 , length.out=30 )


         Next we need to extract the posterior samples, because we’ll simulate observations for each set of
         samples. Then it really is just a matter of using the model definition with the samples, as in previous
         examples. The model defines the distribution of M. We just convert that definition to the correspond-
         ing simulation function, which is rnorm in this case:
R code
 5.26    post <- extract.samples( m5.3_A )
         M_sim <- with( post , sapply( 1:30 ,
             function(i) rnorm( 1e3 , aM + bAM*A_seq[i] , sigma_M ) ) )


         I used the with function, which saves us having to type post$ in front of every parameter name. The
         linear model inside rnorm comes right out of the model definition. This produces a matrix of values,
         with samples in rows and cases corresponding to the values in A_seq in the columns. Now that we
         have simulated values for M, we can simulate D too:
R code
 5.27    D_sim <- with( post , sapply( 1:30 ,
             function(i) rnorm( 1e3 , a + bA*A_seq[i] + bM*M_sim[,i] , sigma ) ) )


         If you plot A_seq against the column means of D_sim, you’ll see the same result as before. In complex
         models, there might be many more variables to simulate. But the basic procedure is the same.



                                            5.2. Masked relationship
              The divorce rate example demonstrates that multiple predictor variables are useful for
         knocking out spurious association. A second reason to use more than one predictor variable
         is to measure the direct influences of multiple factors on an outcome, when none of those
         influences is apparent from bivariate relationships. This kind of problem tends to arise when
         there are two predictor variables that are correlated with one another. However, one of these
         is positively correlated with the outcome and the other is negatively correlated with it.
              You’ll consider this kind of problem in a new data context, information about the com-
         position of milk across primate species, as well as some facts about those species, like body
         mass and brain size.84 Milk is a huge investment, being much more expensive than gestation.
         Such an expensive resource is likely adjusted in subtle ways, depending upon the physiolog-
         ical and development details of each mammal species. Let’s load the data into R first:
R code
         library(rethinking)
 5.28
         data(milk)
         d <- milk
         str(d)


         You should see in the structure of the data frame that you have 29 rows for 8 variables. The
         variables we’ll consider for now are kcal.per.g (kilocalories of energy per gram of milk),
                                   5.2. MASKED RELATIONSHIP                                  145



mass (average female body mass, in kilograms), and neocortex.perc (percent of total brain
mass that is neocortex mass).
    A popular hypothesis has it that primates with larger brains produce more energetic
milk, so that brains can grow quickly. Answering questions of this sort consumes a lot of
effort in evolutionary biology, because there are many subtle statistical issues that arise when
comparing species. It doesn’t help that many biologists have no reference model other than
a series of regressions, and so the output of the regressions is not really interpretable. The
causal meaning of statistical estimates always depends upon information outside the data.
    We won’t solve these problems here. But we will explore a useful example. The question
here is to what extent energy content of milk, measured here by kilocalories, is related to the
percent of the brain mass that is neocortex. Neocortex is the gray, outer part of the brain
that is especially elaborate in some primates. We’ll end up needing female body mass as
well, to see the masking that hides the relationships among the variables. Let’s standardize
these three variables. As in previous examples, standardizing helps us both get a reliable
approximation of the posterior as well as build reasonable priors.
                                                                                                   R code
d$K <- standardize( d$kcal.per.g )
                                                                                                   5.29
d$N <- standardize( d$neocortex.perc )
d$M <- standardize( log(d$mass) )


   The first model to consider is the simple bivariate regression between kilocalories and
neocortex percent. You already know how to set up this regression. In mathematical form:
                                     Ki ∼ Normal(µi , σ)
                                     µi = α + βN Ni
where K is standardized kilocalories and N is standardized neocortex percent. We still need
to consider the priors. But first let’s just try to run this as a quap model with some vague
priors, because there is another key modeling issue to address first.
                                                                                                   R code
m5.5_draft <- quap(
                                                                                                   5.30
    alist(
        K ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
        mu <- a + bN*N ,
        a ~ dnorm( 0 , 1 ) ,
        bN ~ dnorm( 0 , 1 ) ,
        sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
    ) , data=d )


When you execute this code, you’ll get a confusing error message:
Error in quap(alist(K ~ dnorm(mu, sigma), mu <- a + bN * N, a ~ dnorm(0, :
  initial value in 'vmmin' is not finite
The start values for the parameters were invalid. This could be caused by
missing values (NA) in the data or by start values outside the parameter
constraints. If there are no NAs, try using explicit start values.
What has gone wrong here? This particular error message means that the model didn’t return
a valid probability for even the starting parameter values. In this case, the culprit is the
missing values in the N variable. Take a look inside the original variable and see for yourself:
         146                     5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES




R code
         d$neocortex.perc
 5.31

          [1] 55.16      NA    NA    NA    NA 64.54 64.54 67.64             NA 68.85 58.85 61.69
         [13] 60.32      NA    NA 69.97    NA 70.41    NA 73.40             NA 67.53    NA 71.26
         [25] 72.60      NA 70.24 76.30 75.49
         Each NA in the output is a missing value. If you pass a vector like this to a likelihood func-
         tion like dnorm, it doesn’t know what to do. After all, what’s the probability of a missing
         value? Whatever the answer, it isn’t a number, and so dnorm returns a NaN. Unable to even
         get started, quap (or rather optim, which does the real work) gives up and barks about some
         weird thing called vmmin not being finite. This kind of opaque error message is unfortunately
         the norm in R. The additional part of the message suggesting NA values might be responsible
         is just quap taking a guess.
              This is easy to fix. What you need to do here is manually drop all the cases with missing
         values. This is known as a complete case analysis. More automated model fitting com-
         mands, like lm and glm, will silently drop such cases for you. But this isn’t always a good
         thing. First, it’s validity depends upon the process that caused these particular values to go
         missing. In Chapter 15, you’ll explore this in much more depth. Second, once you start com-
         paring models, you must compare models fit to the same data. If some variables have missing
         values that others do not, automated tools will silently produce misleading comparisons.
              Let’s march forward for now, dropping any cases with missing values. It’s worth learning
         how to do this yourself. To make a new data frame with only complete cases, use:
R code
         dcc <- d[ complete.cases(d$K,d$N,d$M) , ]
 5.32

         This makes a new data frame, dcc, that consists of the 17 rows from d that have no missing
         values in any of the variables listed inside complete.cases. Now let’s work with the new
         data frame. All that is new in the code is using dcc instead of d:
R code
         m5.5_draft <- quap(
 5.33
             alist(
                 K ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
                 mu <- a + bN*N ,
                 a ~ dnorm( 0 , 1 ) ,
                 bN ~ dnorm( 0 , 1 ) ,
                 sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
             ) , data=dcc )


         Before considering the posterior predictions, let’s consider those priors. As in many simple
         linear regression problems, these priors are harmless. But are they reasonable? It is impor-
         tant to build reasonable priors, because as the model becomes less simple, the priors can
         be very helpful, but only if they are scientifically reasonable. To simulate and plot 50 prior
         regression lines:
R code
         prior <- extract.prior( m5.5_draft )
 5.34
         xseq <- c(-2,2)
         mu <- link( m5.5_draft , post=prior , data=list(N=xseq) )
                                                          5.2. MASKED RELATIONSHIP                                                  147




                                        a ~ dnorm(0, 1)                                                  a ~ dnorm(0, 0.2)
                                       bN ~ dnorm(0, 1)                                                 bN ~ dnorm(0, 0.5)
                        2                                                                   2




  kilocal per g (std)                                                 kilocal per g (std)
                        1                                                                   1



                        0                                                                   0



                        -1                                                                  -1



                        -2                                                                  -2

                             -2       -1       0       1         2                               -2     -1       0       1      2
                                    neocortex percent (std)                                           neocortex percent (std)

                             Figure 5.8. Prior predictive distributions for the first primate milk model,
                             m5.5. Each plot shows a range of 2 standard deviations for each variable.
                             Left: The vague first guess. These priors are clearly silly. Right: Slightly less
                             silly priors that at least stay within the potential space of observations.



plot( NULL , xlim=xseq , ylim=xseq )
for ( i in 1:50 ) lines( xseq , mu[i,] , col=col.alpha("black",0.3) )


The result is displayed on the left side of Figure 5.8. I’ve shown a range of 2 standard de-
viations for both variables. So that is most of the outcome space. These lines are crazy. As
in previous examples, we can do better by both tightening the α prior so that it sticks closer
to zero. With two standardized variables, when predictor is zero, the expected value of the
outcome should also be zero. And the slope βN needs to be a bit tighter as well, so that it
doesn’t regularly produce impossibly strong relationships. Here’s an attempt:
                                                                                                                                          R code
m5.5 <- quap(
                                                                                                                                          5.35
    alist(
        K ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
        mu <- a + bN*N ,
        a ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.2 ) ,
        bN ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
        sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
    ) , data=dcc )


If you plot these priors, you’ll get what is shown on the right side of Figure 5.8. These are
still very vague priors, but at least the lines stay within the high probability region of the
observable data.
      Now let’s look at the posterior:
         148                     5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES




R code
         precis( m5.5 )
 5.36

               mean   sd 5.5% 94.5%
         a     0.04 0.15 -0.21 0.29
         bN    0.13 0.22 -0.22 0.49
         sigma 1.00 0.16 0.74 1.26

         From this summary, you can possibly see that this is neither a strong nor very precise asso-
         ciation. The standard deviation is almost twice the posterior mean. But as always, it’s much
         easier to see this if we draw a picture. Tables of numbers are golem speak, and we are not
         golems. We can plot the predicted mean and 89% compatibility interval for the mean to see
         this more easily. The code below contains no surprises. But if have extended the range of N
         values to consider, in xseq, so that the plot looks nicer.
R code
         xseq <- seq( from=min(dcc$N)-0.15 , to=max(dcc$N)+0.15 , length.out=30 )
 5.37
         mu <- link( m5.5 , data=list(N=xseq) )
         mu_mean <- apply(mu,2,mean)
         mu_PI <- apply(mu,2,PI)
         plot( K ~ N , data=dcc )
         lines( xseq , mu_mean , lwd=2 )
         shade( mu_PI , xseq )


         I display this plot in the upper-left of Figure 5.9. The posterior mean line is weakly positive,
         but it is highly imprecise. A lot of mildly positive and negative slopes are plausible, given this
         model and these data.
              Now consider another predictor variable, adult female body mass, mass in the data
         frame. Let’s use the logarithm of mass, log(mass), as a predictor as well. Why the logarithm
         of mass instead of the raw mass in kilograms? It is often true that scaling measurements like
         body mass are related by magnitudes to other variables. Taking the log of a measure trans-
         lates the measure into magnitudes. So by using the logarithm of body mass here, we’re saying
         that we suspect that the magnitude of a mother’s body mass is related to milk energy, in a
         linear fashion. Much later, in Chapter 16, you’ll see why these logarithmic relationships are
         almost inevitable results of the physics of organisms.
              Now we construct a similar model, but consider the bivariate relationship between kilo-
         calories and body mass. Since body mass is also standardized, we can use the same priors
         and stay within possible outcome values. But if you were a domain expert in growth, you
         could surely do better than this.
R code
         m5.6 <- quap(
 5.38
             alist(
                 K ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
                 mu <- a + bM*M ,
                 a ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.2 ) ,
                 bM ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
                 sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
             ) , data=dcc )
         precis(m5.6)
                                                                   5.2. MASKED RELATIONSHIP                                                         149




                          2.0                                                                            2.0

                          1.5                                                                            1.5




  kilocal per g (std)                                                            kilocal per g (std)
                          1.0                                                                            1.0

                          0.5                                                                            0.5

                          0.0                                                                            0.0

                          -0.5                                                                           -0.5

                          -1.0                                                                           -1.0

                                 -2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5   0.0   0.5     1.0   1.5                                  -2        -1       0           1
                                       neocortex percent (std)                                                           log body mass (std)


                                     Counterfactual holding M = 0                                                    Counterfactual holding N = 0
                          2.0                                                                            2.0

                          1.5                                                                            1.5




    kilocal per g (std)                                                            kilocal per g (std)
                          1.0                                                                            1.0

                          0.5                                                                            0.5

                          0.0                                                                            0.0

                          -0.5                                                                           -0.5

                          -1.0                                                                           -1.0

                                 -2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5   0.0   0.5     1.0   1.5                                  -2         -1       0          1
                                        neocortex percent (std)                                                          log body mass (std)

                                 Figure 5.9. Milk energy and neocortex among primates. In the top two
                                 plots, simple bivariate regressions of kilocalories per gram of milk (K) on
                                 (left) neocortex percent (N) and (right) log female body mass (M) show
                                 weak associations. In the bottom row, a model with both neocortex percent
                                 (N) and log body mass (M) shows stronger associations.

      mean   sd 5.5% 94.5%
a     0.05 0.15 -0.20 0.29
bM   -0.28 0.19 -0.59 0.03
sigma 0.95 0.16 0.70 1.20
Log-mass is negatively associated with kilocalories. This association does seem stronger than
that of neocortex percent, although in the opposite direction. It is quite uncertain though,
with a wide compatibility interval that is consistent with a wide range of both weak and
stronger relationships. This regression is shown in the upper-right of Figure 5.9. You should
modify the code that plotted the upper-left plot in the same figure, to be sure you understand
how to do this.
         150                     5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES



             Now let’s see what happens when we add both predictor variables at the same time to the
         regression. This is the multivariate model, in math form:
                                              Ki ∼ Normal(µi , σ)
                                              µ i = α + β N Ni + β M M i
                                              α ∼ Normal(0, 0.2)
                                           βN ∼ Normal(0, 0.5)
                                          βM ∼ Normal(0, 0.5)
                                              σ ∼ Exponential(1)
         Approximating the posterior requires no new tricks:
R code
         m5.7 <- quap(
 5.39
             alist(
                 K ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
                 mu <- a + bN*N + bM*M ,
                 a ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.2 ) ,
                 bN ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
                 bM ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
                 sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
             ) , data=dcc )
         precis(m5.7)


               mean   sd 5.5% 94.5%
         a     0.07 0.13 -0.15 0.28
         bN    0.68 0.25 0.28 1.07
         bM   -0.70 0.22 -1.06 -0.35
         sigma 0.74 0.13 0.53 0.95
         By incorporating both predictor variables in the regression, the posterior association of both
         with the outcome has increased. Visually comparing this posterior to those of the previous
         two models helps to see the pattern of change:
R code
         plot( coeftab( m5.5 , m5.6 , m5.7 ) , pars=c("bM","bN") )
 5.40


                            bM
                              m5.7
                              m5.6
                              m5.5

                            bN
                              m5.7
                              m5.6
                              m5.5

                                       -1.0        -0.5       0.0          0.5   1.0
                                                            Estimate

         The posterior means for neocortex percent and log-mass have both moved away from zero.
         Adding both predictors to the model seems to have made their estimates move apart.
                                   5.2. MASKED RELATIONSHIP                                   151



    What happened here? Why did adding neocortex and body mass to the same model
lead to stronger associations for both? This is a context in which there are two variables
correlated with the outcome, but one is positively correlated with it and the other is negatively
correlated with it. In addition, both of the explanatory variables are positively correlated with
one another. Try a simple pairs( ~K + M + N , dcc ) plot to appreciate this pattern of
correlation. The result of this pattern is that the variables tend to cancel one another out.
    This is another case in which multiple regression automatically finds the most revealing
cases and uses them to produce inferences. What the regression model does is ask if species
that have high neocortex percent for their body mass have higher milk energy. Likewise, the
model asks if species with high body mass for their neocortex percent have higher milk energy.
Bigger species, like apes, have milk with less energy. But species with more neocortex tend
to have richer milk. The fact that these two variables, body size and neocortex, are correlated
across species makes it hard to see these relationships, unless we account for both.
    Some DAGs will help. There are at least three graphs consistent with these data.


  M                         N      M                         N      M            U           N




               K                                K                                K

Beginning on the left, the first possibility is that body mass (M) influences neocortex percent
(N). Both then influence kilocalories in milk (K). Second, in the middle, neocortex could
instead influence body mass. The two variables still end up correlated in the sample. Finally,
on the right, there could be an unobserved variable U that influences both M and N, produc-
ing a correlation between them. In this book, I’ll circle variables that are unobserved. One
of the threats to causal inference is that there are potentially many unobserved variables that
influence an outcome or the predictors. We’ll consider this more in the next chapter.
     Which of these graphs is right? We can’t tell from the data alone, because these graphs
imply the same set of conditional independencies. In this case, there are no conditional
independencies—each DAG above implies that all pairs of variables are associated, regardless
of what we condition on. A set of DAGs with the same conditional independencies is known
as a Markov equivalence set. In the Overthinking box on the next page, I’ll show you
how to simulate observations consistent with each of these DAGs, how each can produce
the masking phenomenon, and how to use the dagitty package to compute the complete
set of Markov equivalent DAGs. Remember that while the data alone can never tell you
which causal model is correct, your scientific knowledge of the variables will eliminate a
large number of silly, but Markov equivalent, DAGs.
     The final thing we’d like to do with these models is to finish Figure 5.9. Let’s make
counterfactual plots again. Suppose the third DAG above is the right one. Then imagine ma-
nipulating M and N, breaking the influence of U on each. In the real world, such experiments
are impossible. If we change an animal’s body size, natural selection would then change the
other features to match it. But these counterfactual plots do help us see how the model views
the association between each predictor and the outcome. Here is the code to produce the
lower-left plot in Figure 5.9 (page 149).
         152                       5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES




R code
         xseq <- seq( from=min(dcc$M)-0.15 , to=max(dcc$M)+0.15 , length.out=30 )
 5.41
         mu <- link( m5.7 , data=data.frame( M=xseq , N=0 ) )
         mu_mean <- apply(mu,2,mean)
         mu_PI <- apply(mu,2,PI)
         plot( NULL , xlim=range(dcc$M) , ylim=range(dcc$K) )
         lines( xseq , mu_mean , lwd=2 )
         shade( mu_PI , xseq )


         You should try to reproduce the lower-right plot by modifying this code. In the practice
         problems, I’ll ask you to consider what would happen, if you chose one of the other DAGs at
         the top of the page.

         Overthinking: Simulating a masking relationship. Just as with understanding spurious association
         (page 139), it may help to simulate data in which two meaningful predictors act to mask one another.
         In the previous section, I showed three DAGs consistent with this. To simulate data consistent with
         the first DAG:
R code
 5.42    # M -> K <- N
         # M -> N
         n <- 100
         M <- rnorm( n )
         N <- rnorm( n , M )
         K <- rnorm( n , N - M )
         d_sim <- data.frame(K=K,N=N,M=M)


         You can quickly see the masking pattern of inferences by replacing dcc with d_sim in models m5.5,
         m5.6, and m5.7. Look at the precis summaries and you’ll see the same masking pattern where the
         slopes become more extreme in m5.7. The other two DAGs can be simulated like this:
R code
 5.43    # M -> K <- N
         # N -> M
         n <- 100
         N <- rnorm( n )
         M <- rnorm( n , N )
         K <- rnorm( n , N - M )
         d_sim2 <- data.frame(K=K,N=N,M=M)

         # M -> K <- N
         # M <- U -> N
         n <- 100
         U <- rnorm( n )
         N <- rnorm( n , U )
         M <- rnorm( n , U )
         K <- rnorm( n , N - M )
         d_sim3 <- data.frame(K=K,N=N,M=M)


         In the primate milk example, it may be that the positive association between large body size and
         neocortex percent arises from a tradeoff between lifespan and learning. Large animals tend to live
         a long time. And in such animals, an investment in learning may be a better investment, because
         learning can be amortized over a longer lifespan. Both large body size and large neocortex then
         influence milk composition, but in different directions, for different reasons. This story implies that
         the DAG with an arrow from M to N, the first one, is the right one. But with the evidence at hand,
                                     5.3. CATEGORICAL VARIABLES                                    153



we cannot easily see which is right. To compute the Markov equivalence set, let’s define the first
DAG and ask dagitty to do the hard work:
                                                                                                          R code
dag5.7 <- dagitty( "dag{                                                                                  5.44
    M -> K <- N
    M -> N }" )
coordinates(dag5.7) <- list( x=c(M=0,K=1,N=2) , y=c(M=0.5,K=1,N=0.5) )
MElist <- equivalentDAGs(dag5.7)


Now MElist should contain six different DAGs. To plot them all, you can use drawdag(MElist).
Which of these do you think you could eliminate, based upon scientific knowledge of the variables?




                                   5.3. Categorical variables
    A common question for statistical methods is to what extent an outcome changes as a
result of presence or absence of a category. A category here means discrete and unordered.
For example, consider the different species in the milk energy data again. Some of them are
apes, while others are New World monkeys. We might want to ask how predictions should
vary when the species is an ape instead of a monkey. Taxonomic group is a categorical
variable, because no species can be half-ape and half-monkey (discreteness), and there
is no sense in which one is larger or smaller than the other (unordered). Other common
examples of categorical variables include:
       • Sex: male, female
       • Developmental status: infant, juvenile, adult
       • Geographic region: Africa, Europe, Melanesia
     Many readers will already know that variables like this, routinely called factors, can
easily be included in linear models. But what is not widely understood is how these variables
are represented in a model. The computer does all of the work for us, hiding the machinery.
But there are some subtleties that make it worth exposing the machinery. Knowing how the
machine (golem) works both helps you interpret the posterior distribution and gives you
additional power in building the model.

Rethinking: Continuous countries. With automated software and lack of attention, categorical vari-
ables can be dangerous. In 2015, a high-impact journal published a study of 1170 children from
six countries, finding a strong negative association between religiosity and generosity.85 The paper
caused a small stir among religion researchers, because it disagreed with the existing literature. Upon
reanalysis, it was found that the country variable, which is categorical, was entered as a continuous
variable instead. This made Canada (value 2) twice as much “country” as the United States (value 1).
After reanalysis with country as a categorical variable, the result vanished and the original paper has
been retracted. This is a happy ending, because the authors shared their data. How many cases like
this exist, undiscovered because the data have never been shared and are possible lost forever?


5.3.1. Binary categories. In the simplest case, the variable of interest has only two cate-
gories, like male and female. Let’s rewind to the Kalahari data you met in Chapter 4. Back
then, we ignored sex when predicting height, but obviously we expect males and females to
have different averages. Take a look at the variables available:
         154                      5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES




R code
         data(Howell1)
 5.45
         d <- Howell1
         str(d)


         'data.frame': 544 obs. of 4 variables:
          $ height: num 152 140 137 157 145 ...
          $ weight: num 47.8 36.5 31.9 53 41.3 ...
          $ age   : num 63 63 65 41 51 35 32 27 19 54 ...
          $ male : int 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 ...

         The male variable is our new predictor, an example of a indicator variable. Indicator
         variables—sometimes also called “dummy” variables—are devices for encoding unordered
         categories into quantitative models. There is no sense here in which “male” is one more than
         “female.” The purpose of the male variable is to indicate when a person in the sample is
         “male.” So it takes the value 1 whenever the person is male, but it takes the value 0 when the
         person belongs to any other category. It doesn’t matter which category is indicated by the 1.
         The model won’t care. But correctly interpreting the model demands that you remember, so
         it’s a good idea to name the variable after the category assigned the 1 value.
               There are two ways to make a model with this information. The first is to use the indicator
         variable directly inside the linear model, as if it were a typical predictor variable. The effect of
         an indicator variable is to turn a parameter on for those cases in the category. Simultaneously,
         the variable turns the same parameter off for those cases in another category. This will make
         more sense, once you see it in the mathematical definition of the model. Consider again a
         linear model of height, as in Chapter 4. Now we’ll ignore weight and the other variables and
         focus only on sex.
                                               hi ∼ Normal(µi , σ)
                                               µi = α + βm mi
                                               α ∼ Normal(178, 20)
                                              βm ∼ Normal(0, 10)
                                               σ ∼ Uniform(0, 50)

         where h is height and m is the dummy variable indicating a male individual. The parameter
         βm influences prediction only for those cases where mi = 1. When mi = 0, it has no effect
         on prediction, because it is multiplied by zero inside the linear model, α + βm mi , canceling it
         out, whatever its value. This is just to say that, when mi = 1, the linear model is µi = α+βm .
         And when mi = 0, the linear model is simply µi = α.
               Using this approach means that βm represents the expected difference between males
         and females in height. The parameter α is used to predict both female and male heights. But
         male height gets an extra βm . This also means that α is no longer the average height in the
         sample, but rather just the average female height. This can make assigning sensible priors a
         little harder. If you don’t have a sense of the expected difference in height—what would be
         reasonable before seeing the data?—then this approach can be a bother. Of course you could
         get away with a vague prior in this case—there is a lot of data.
               Another consequence of having to assign a prior to the difference is that this approach
         necessarily assumes there is more uncertainty about one of the categories—“male” in this
         case—than the other. Why? Because a prediction for a male includes two parameters and
                                   5.3. CATEGORICAL VARIABLES                                 155



therefore two priors. We can simulate this directly from the priors. The prior distributions
for µ for females and males are:
                                                                                                    R code
mu_female <- rnorm(1e4,178,20)
                                                                                                    5.46
mu_male <- rnorm(1e4,178,20) + rnorm(1e4,0,10)
precis( data.frame( mu_female , mu_male ) )


'data.frame': 10000 obs. of 2 variables:
            mean    sd   5.5% 94.5% histogram
mu_female 178.41 20.04 146.30 209.94 ▁▁▃▇▇▂▁▁
mu_male   177.97 22.40 142.39 214.82 ▁▁▁▃▇▇▂▁▁
The prior for males is wider, because it uses both parameters. While in a regression this
simple, these priors will wash out very quickly, in general we should be careful. We aren’t
actually more unsure about male height than female height, a priori. Is there another way?
    Another approach available to us is an index variable. An index variable contains
integers that correspond to different categories. The integers are just names, but they also let
us reference a list of corresponding parameters, one for each category. In this case, we can
construct our index like this:
                                                                                                    R code
d$sex <- ifelse( d$male==1 , 2 , 1 )
                                                                                                    5.47
str( d$sex )


 num [1:544] 2 1 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 ...
Now “1” means female and “2” means male. No order is implied. These are just labels. And
the mathematical version of the model becomes:
                             hi ∼ Normal(µi , σ)
                             µi = αsex[i]
                             αj ∼ Normal(178, 20) for j = 1..2
                             σ ∼ Uniform(0, 50)
What this does is create a list of α parameters, one for each unique value in the index variable.
So in this case we end up with two α parameters, named α1 and α2 . The numbers correspond
to the values in the index variable sex. I know this seems overly complicated, but it solves
our problem with the priors. Now the same prior can be assigned to each, corresponding to
the notion that all the categories are the same, prior to the data. Neither category has more
prior uncertainty than the other. And as you’ll see in a bit, this approach extends effortlessly
to contexts with more than two categories.
    Let’s approximate the posterior for the above model, the one using an index variable.
                                                                                                    R code
m5.8 <- quap(
                                                                                                    5.48
    alist(
        height ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
        mu <- a[sex] ,
        a[sex] ~ dnorm( 178 , 20 ) ,
        sigma ~ dunif( 0 , 50 )
    ) , data=d )
precis( m5.8 , depth=2 )
         156                     5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES



                mean   sd   5.5% 94.5%
         a[1] 134.91 1.61 132.34 137.48
         a[2] 142.58 1.70 139.86 145.29
         sigma 27.31 0.83 25.98 28.63
         Note the depth=2 that I added to precis. This tells it to show any vector parameters, like
         our new a vector. Vector (and matrix) parameters are hidden by precies by default, because
         sometimes there are lots of these and you don’t want to inspect their individual values. You’ll
         see what I mean in later chapters.
             Interpreting these parameters is easy enough—they are the expected heights in each cat-
         egory. But often we are interested in differences between categories. In this case, what is
         the expected difference between females and males? We can compute this using samples
         from the posterior. In fact, I’ll extract posterior samples into a data frame and insert our
         calculation directly into the same frame:
R code
         post <- extract.samples(m5.8)
 5.49
         post$diff_fm <- post$a[,1] - post$a[,2]
         precis( post , depth=2 )


         quap posterior: 10000 samples from m5.8
                   mean   sd   5.5% 94.5%      histogram
         sigma    27.29 0.84 25.95 28.63 ▁▁▁▁▃▇▇▇▃▂▁▁▁
         a[1]    134.91 1.59 132.37 137.42 ▁▁▁▂▅▇▇▅▂▁▁▁▁
         a[2]    142.60 1.71 139.90 145.35     ▁▁▁▅▇▃▁▁▁
         diff_fm -7.70 2.33 -11.41 -3.97     ▁▁▁▁▃▇▇▃▁▁▁
         Our calculation appears at the bottom, as a new parameter in the posterior. This is the ex-
         pected difference between a female and male in the sample. This kind of calculation is called
         a contrast. No matter how many categories you have, you can use samples from the pos-
         terior to compute the contrast between any two.

         5.3.2. Many categories. Binary categories are easy, whether you use an indicator variable
         or instead an index variable. But when there are more than two categories, the indicator
         variable approach explodes. You’ll need a new indicator variable for each new category. If
         you have k unique categories, you need k − 1 indicator variables. Automated tools like R’s
         lm do in fact go this route, constructing k − 1 indicator variables for you and returning k − 1
         parameters (in addition to the intercept).
             But we’ll instead stick with the index variable approach. It does not change at all when
         you add more categories. You do get more parameters, of course, just as many as in the
         indicator variable approach. But the model specification looks just like it does in the bi-
         nary case. And the priors continue to be easier, unless you really do have prior information
         about contrasts. It is also important to get used to index variables, because multilevel models
         (Chapter 13) depend upon them.
             Let’s explore an example using the primate milk data again. We’re interested now in the
         clade variable, which encodes the broad taxonomic membership of each species:

R code
         data(milk)
 5.50
         d <- milk
         levels(d$clade)
                                 5.3. CATEGORICAL VARIABLES                               157



[1] "Ape" "New World Monkey" "Old World Monkey" "Strepsirrhine"
We want an index value for each of these four categories. You could do this by hand, but just
coercing the factor to an integer will do the job:
                                                                                                R code
d$clade_id <- as.integer( d$clade )
                                                                                                5.51

Let’s use a model to measure the average milk energy in each clade. In math form:
                            Ki ∼ Normal(µi , σ)
                            µi = αclade[i]
                            αj ∼ Normal(0, 0.5) for j = 1..4
                             σ ∼ Exponential(1)
Remember, K is the standardized kilocalories. I widened the prior on α a little, to allow
the different clades to disperse, if the data wants them to. But I encourage you to play with
that prior and repeatedly re-approximate the posterior so you can see how the posterior
differences among the categories depend upon it. Firing up quap now:
                                                                                                R code
d$K <- standardize( d$kcal.per.g )
                                                                                                5.52
m5.9 <- quap(
    alist(
        K ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ),
        mu <- a[clade_id],
        a[clade_id] ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ),
        sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
    ) , data=d )
labels <- paste( "a[" , 1:4 , "]:" , levels(d$clade) , sep="" )
plot( precis( m5.9 , depth=2 , pars="a" ) , labels=labels ,
    xlab="expected kcal (std)" )



             a[1]:Ape
             a[2]:New World Monkey
             a[3]:Old World Monkey
             a[4]:Strepsirrhine

                                     -1.0     -0.5      0.0       0.5     1.0
                                                 expected kcal (std)

I used the optional labels argument to augment the parameter names a[1] through a[4]
with the clade names from the original variable. In practice, you have to be very careful to
keep track of which index values go with which categories. Don’t trust R’s factor variable
type to necessarily do things right.
    If you have another kind of categorical variable that you’d like to add to the model, the
approach is just the same. For example, let’s randomly assign these primates to some made
up categories: [1] Gryffindor, [2] Hufflepuff, [3] Ravenclaw, and [4] Slytherin.
                                                                                                R code
set.seed(63)
                                                                                                5.53
d$house <- sample( rep(1:4,each=8) , size=nrow(d) )
         158                        5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES



         Now we can include these categories as another predictor in the model:
R code
         m5.10 <- quap(
 5.54
             alist(
                 K ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ),
                 mu <- a[clade_id] + h[house],
                 a[clade_id] ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ),
                 h[house] ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ),
                 sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
             ) , data=d )


         If you inspect the posterior, you’ll see that Slytherin stands out.



         Rethinking: Differences and statistical significance. A common error in interpretation of parameter
         estimates is to suppose that because one parameter is sufficiently far from zero—is “significant”—and
         another parameter is not—is “not significant”—that the difference between the parameters is also
         significant. This is not necessarily so.86 This isn’t just an issue for non-Bayesian analysis: If you want
         to know the distribution of a difference, then you must compute that difference, a contrast. It
         isn’t enough to just observe, for example, that a slope among males overlaps a lot with zero while the
         same slope among females is reliably above zero. You must compute the posterior distribution of the
         difference in slope between males and females. For example, suppose you have posterior distributions
         for two parameters, βf and βm . βf ’s mean and standard deviation is 0.15±0.02, and βm ’s is 0.02±0.10.
         So while βf is reliably different from zero (“significant”) and βm is not, the difference between the two
                                                                   √
         (assuming they are uncorrelated) is (0.15 − 0.02) ± 0.022 + 0.12 ≈ 0.13 ± 0.10. The distribution
         of the difference overlaps a lot with zero. In other words, you can be confident that βf is far from zero,
         but you cannot be sure that the difference between βf and βm is far from zero.
               In the context of non-Bayesian significance testing, this phenomenon arises from the fact that
         statistical significance is inferentially powerful in one way: difference from the null. When βm over-
         laps with zero, it may also overlap with values very far from zero. Its value is uncertain. So when you
         then compare βm to βf , that comparison is also uncertain, manifesting in the width of the posterior
         distribution of the difference βf − βm . Lurking underneath this example is a more fundamental mis-
         take in interpreting statistical significance: The mistake of accepting the null hypothesis. Whenever
         an article or book says something like “we found no difference” or “no effect,” this usually means
         that some parameter was not significantly different from zero, and so the authors adopted zero as the
         estimate. This is both illogical and extremely common.




                                                    5.4. Summary
              This chapter introduced multiple regression, a way of constructing descriptive models
         for how the mean of a measurement is associated with more than one predictor variable. The
         defining question of multiple regression is: What is the value of knowing each predictor, once
         we already know the other predictors? The answer to this question does not by itself provide
         any causal information. Causal inference requires additional assumptions. Simple directed
         acyclic graph (DAG) models of causation are one way to represent those assumptions. In
         the next chapter we’ll continue building the DAG framework and see how adding predictor
         variables can create as many problems as it can solve.
                                              5.5. PRACTICE                                            159



                                            5.5. Practice
Problems are labeled Easy (E), Medium (M), and Hard (H).

5E1. Which of the linear models below are multiple linear regressions?
      (1) µi = α + βxi
      (2) µi = βx xi + βz zi
      (3) µi = α + β(xi − zi )
      (4) µi = α + βx xi + βz zi

5E2. Write down a multiple regression to evaluate the claim: Animal diversity is linearly related to
latitude, but only after controlling for plant diversity. You just need to write down the model definition.

5E3. Write down a multiple regression to evaluate the claim: Neither amount of funding nor size
of laboratory is by itself a good predictor of time to PhD degree; but together these variables are both
positively associated with time to degree. Write down the model definition and indicate which side of
zero each slope parameter should be on.

5E4. Suppose you have a single categorical predictor with 4 levels (unique values), labeled A, B, C
and D. Let Ai be an indicator variable that is 1 where case i is in category A. Also suppose Bi , Ci ,
and Di for the other categories. Now which of the following linear models are inferentially equivalent
ways to include the categorical variable in a regression? Models are inferentially equivalent when it’s
possible to compute one posterior distribution from the posterior distribution of another model.
      (1) µi = α + βA Ai + βB Bi + βD Di
      (2) µi = α + βA Ai + βB Bi + βC Ci + βD Di
      (3) µi = α + βB Bi + βC Ci + βD Di
      (4) µi = αA Ai + αB Bi + αC Ci + αD Di
      (5) µi = αA (1 − Bi − Ci − Di ) + αB Bi + αC Ci + αD Di

5M1. Invent your own example of a spurious correlation. An outcome variable should be correlated
with both predictor variables. But when both predictors are entered in the same model, the correlation
between the outcome and one of the predictors should mostly vanish (or at least be greatly reduced).

5M2. Invent your own example of a masked relationship. An outcome variable should be correlated
with both predictor variables, but in opposite directions. And the two predictor variables should be
correlated with one another.

5M3. It is sometimes observed that the best predictor of fire risk is the presence of firefighters—
States and localities with many firefighters also have more fires. Presumably firefighters do not cause
fires. Nevertheless, this is not a spurious correlation. Instead fires cause firefighters. Consider the
same reversal of causal inference in the context of the divorce and marriage data. How might a high
divorce rate cause a higher marriage rate? Can you think of a way to evaluate this relationship, using
multiple regression?

5M4. In the divorce data, States with high numbers of members of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints (LDS) have much lower divorce rates than the regression models expected. Find a
list of LDS population by State and use those numbers as a predictor variable, predicting divorce rate
using marriage rate, median age at marriage, and percent LDS population (possibly standardized).
You may want to consider transformations of the raw percent LDS variable.
160                        5. THE MANY VARIABLES & THE SPURIOUS WAFFLES



5M5. One way to reason through multiple causation hypotheses is to imagine detailed mechanisms
through which predictor variables may influence outcomes. For example, it is sometimes argued that
the price of gasoline (predictor variable) is positively associated with lower obesity rates (outcome
variable). However, there are at least two important mechanisms by which the price of gas could
reduce obesity. First, it could lead to less driving and therefore more exercise. Second, it could lead to
less driving, which leads to less eating out, which leads to less consumption of huge restaurant meals.
Can you outline one or more multiple regressions that address these two mechanisms? Assume you
can have any predictor data you need.
5H1. In the divorce example, suppose the DAG is: M → A → D. What are the implied conditional
independencies of the graph? Are the data consistent with it?
5H2. Assuming that the DAG for the divorce example is indeed M → A → D, fit a new model and
use it to estimate the counterfactual effect of halving a State’s marriage rate M. Use the counterfactual
example from the chapter (starting on page 140) as a template.
5H3. Return to the milk energy model, m5.7. Suppose that the true causal relationship among the
variables is:
                                      M                           N




                                                    K

Now compute the counterfactual effect on K of doubling M. You will need to account for both the
direct and indirect paths of causation. Use the counterfactual example from the chapter (starting on
page 140) as a template.
5H4. Here is an open practice problem to engage your imagination. In the divorce date, States in
the southern United States have many of the highest divorce rates. Add the South indicator variable
to the analysis. First, draw one or more DAGs that represent your ideas for how Southern American
culture might influence any of the other three variables (D, M or A). Then list the testable implications
of your DAGs, if there are any, and fit one or more models to evaluate the implications. What do you
think the influence of “Southerness” is?
6       The Haunted DAG & The Causal Terror



     It seems like the most newsworthy scientific studies are the least trustworthy. The more
likely it is to kill you, if true, the less likely it is to be true. The more boring the topic, the
more rigorous the results. How could this widely believed negative correlation exist? There
doesn’t seem to be any reason for studies of topics that people care about to produce less
reliable results. Maybe popular topics attract more and worse researchers, like flies drawn to
the smell of honey?
     Actually all that is necessary for such a negative correlation to arise is that peer reviewers
care about both newsworthiness and trustworthiness. Whether it is grant review or journal
review, if editors and reviewers care about both, then the act of selection itself is enough to
make the most newsworthy studies the least trustworthy. In fact, it’s hard to imagine how
scientific peer review could avoid creating this negative correlation. And, dear reader, this
fact will help us understand the perils of multiple regression.
     Here’s a simple simulation to illustrate the point.87 Suppose a grant review panel receives
200 research proposals. Among these proposals, there is no correlation at all between trust-
worthiness (rigor, scholarship, plausibility of success) and newsworthiness (social welfare
value, public interest). The panel weighs trustworthiness and newsworthiness equally. Then
they rank the proposals by their combined scores and select the top 10% for funding.
     At the end of this section, I show the code to simulate this thought experiment. Fig-
ure 6.1 displays the full sample of simulated proposals, with those selected in blue. I’ve
drawn a simple linear regression line through the selected proposals. There’s the negative
correlation, −0.77 in this example. Strong selection induces a negative correlation among
the criteria used in selection. Why? If the only way to cross the threshold is to score high, it is
more common to score high on one item than on both. Therefore among funded proposals,
the most newsworthy studies can actually have less than average trustworthiness (less than 0
in the figure). Similarly the most trustworthy studies can be less newsworthy than average.
     This general phenomenon has been recognized for a long time. It is sometimes called
Berkson’s paradox.88 But it is easier to remember if we call it the selection-distortion
effect. Once you appreciate this effect, you’ll see it everywhere. Why do so many restaurants
in good locations have bad food? The only way a restaurant with less-than-good food can
survive is if it is in a nice location. Similarly, restaurants with excellent food can survive even
in bad locations. Selection-distortion ruins your city.
     What does this have to do with multiple regression? Unfortunately, everything. The
previous chapter demonstrated some amazing powers of multiple regression. It can smoke
out spurious correlations and clear up masking effects. This may encourage the view that,
when in doubt, just add everything to the model and let the oracle of regression sort it out.


                                               161
         162                                     6. THE HAUNTED DAG & THE CAUSAL TERROR




                           3

                                                     selected
                           2
                                                                    Figure 6.1. Why the most newsworthy stud-



         trustworthiness
                           1
                                                                    ies might be the least trustworthy. 200 re-
                           0
                                                                    search proposals are ranked by combined
                                                                    trustworthiness and newsworthiness. The top
                           -1                                       10% are selected for funding. While there is
                                                                    no correlation before selection, the two crite-
                           -2
                                                                    ria are strongly negatively correlated after se-
                                              rejected
                           -3
                                                                    lection. The correlation here is −0.77.

                                -2   -1   0      1       2      3
                                      newsworthiness


              Regression will not sort it out. Regression is indeed an oracle, but a cruel one. It speaks
         in riddles and delights in punishing us for asking bad questions. The selection-distortion
         effect can happen inside of a multiple regression, because the act of adding a predictor in-
         duces statistical selection within the model, a phenomenon that goes by the unhelpful name
         collider bias. This can mislead us into believing, for example, that there is a negative as-
         sociation between newsworthiness and trustworthiness in general, when in fact it is just a
         consequence of conditioning on some variable. This is both a deeply confusing fact and one
         that is important to understand in order to regress responsibly.
              This chapter and the next are both about terrible things that can happen when we simply
         add variables to a regression, without a clear idea of a causal model. In this chapter, we’ll ex-
         plore three different hazards: multicollinearity, post-treatment bias, and collider bias. We’ll
         end by tying all of these examples together in a framework that can tell us which variables we
         must and must not add to a model in order to arrive at valid inferences. But this framework
         does not do the most important step for us: It will not give us a valid model.

         Overthinking: Simulated science distortion. Simulations like this one are easy to do in R, or in any
         other scripting language, once you have seen a few examples. In this simulation, we just draw some
         random Gaussian criteria for a sample of proposals and then select the top 10% combined scores.
R code
   6.1   set.seed(1914)
         N <- 200 # num grant proposals
         p <- 0.1 # proportion to select
         # uncorrelated newsworthiness and trustworthiness
         nw <- rnorm(N)
         tw <- rnorm(N)
         # select top 10% of combined scores
         s <- nw + tw # total score
         q <- quantile( s , 1-p ) # top 10% threshold
         selected <- ifelse( s >= q , TRUE , FALSE )
         cor( tw[selected] , nw[selected] )


         I chose a specific seed so you can replicate the result in Figure 6.1, but if you rerun the simulation
         without the set.seed line, you’ll see there is nothing special about the seed I used.
                                     6.1. MULTICOLLINEARITY                                    163



                                   6.1. Multicollinearity
     It is commonly true that there are many potential predictor variables to add to a regres-
sion model. In the case of the primate milk data, for example, there are 7 variables available
to predict any column we choose as an outcome. Why not just build a model that includes
all 7? There are several hazards.
     Let’s begin with the least of your worries: multicollinearity. Multicollinearity means
a very strong association between two or more predictor variables. The raw correlation isn’t
what matters. Rather what matters is the association, conditional on the other variables in
the model. The consequence of multicollinearity is that the posterior distribution will seem
to suggest that none of the variables is reliably associated with the outcome, even if all of the
variables are in reality strongly associated with the outcome.
     This frustrating phenomenon arises from the details of how multiple regression works.
In fact, there is nothing wrong with multicollinearity. The model will work fine for predic-
tion. You will just be frustrated trying to understand it. The hope is that once you understand
multicollinearity, you will better understand regression models in general.
     Let’s begin with a simple simulation. Then we’ll turn to the primate milk data again and
see multicollinearity in a real data set.

6.1.1. Multicollinear legs. Imagine trying to predict an individual’s height using the length
of his or her legs as predictor variables. Surely height is positively associated with leg length,
or at least our simulation will assume it is. Nevertheless, once you put both legs (right and
left) into the model, something vexing will happen.
      The code below will simulate the heights and leg lengths of 100 individuals. For each,
first a height is simulated from a Gaussian distribution. Then each individual gets a simulated
proportion of height for their legs, ranging from 0.4 to 0.5. Finally, each leg is salted with a
little measurement or developmental error, so the left and right legs are not exactly the same
length, as is typical in real populations. At the end, the code puts height and the two leg
lengths into a common data frame.
                                                                                                     R code
N <- 100                                  # number of individuals
                                                                                                     6.2
set.seed(909)
height <- rnorm(N,10,2)                   # sim total height of each
leg_prop <- runif(N,0.4,0.5)              # leg as proportion of height
leg_left <- leg_prop*height +             # sim left leg as proportion + error
    rnorm( N , 0 , 0.02 )
leg_right <- leg_prop*height +            # sim right leg as proportion + error
    rnorm( N , 0 , 0.02 )
                                  # combine into data frame
d <- data.frame(height,leg_left,leg_right)


Now let’s analyze these data, predicting the outcome height with both predictors, leg_left
and leg_right. Before approximating the posterior, however, consider what we expect. On
average, an individual’s legs are 45% of their height (in these simulated data). So we should
expect the beta coefficient that measures the association of a leg with height to end up around
the average height (10) divided by 45% of the average height (4.5). This is 10/4.5 ≈ 2.2. Now
let’s see what happens instead. I’ll use very vague, bad priors here, just so we can be sure that
the priors aren’t responsible for what is about to happen.
         164                          6. THE HAUNTED DAG & THE CAUSAL TERROR




R code
         m6.1 <- quap(
   6.3
             alist(
                 height ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
                 mu <- a + bl*leg_left + br*leg_right ,
                 a ~ dnorm( 10 , 100 ) ,
                 bl ~ dnorm( 2 , 10 ) ,
                 br ~ dnorm( 2 , 10 ) ,
                 sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
             ) , data=d )
         precis(m6.1)


               mean   sd 5.5% 94.5%
         a     0.98 0.28 0.53 1.44
         bl    0.21 2.53 -3.83 4.25
         br    1.78 2.53 -2.26 5.83
         sigma 0.62 0.04 0.55 0.69
         Those posterior means and standard deviations look crazy. This is a case in which a graphical
         view of the precis output is more useful, because it displays the posterior means and 89%
         intervals in a way that allows us with a glance to see that something has gone wrong here:
R code
         plot(precis(m6.1))
   6.4


                         a
                         bl
                         br
                         sigma

                                 -4         -2        0           2         4         6
                                                          Value

         Go ahead and try the simulation a few more times, omitting the set.seed line. If both legs
         have almost identical lengths, and height is so strongly associated with leg length, then why
         is this posterior distribution so weird? Did the posterior approximation work correctly?
               It did work correctly, and the posterior distribution here is the right answer to the ques-
         tion we asked. The problem is the question. Recall that a multiple linear regression answers
         the question: What is the value of knowing each predictor, after already knowing all of the
         other predictors? So in this case, the question becomes: What is the value of knowing each
         leg’s length, after already knowing the other leg’s length?
               The answer to this weird question is equally weird, but perfectly logical. The posterior
         distribution is the answer to this question, considering every possible combination of the
         parameters and assigning relative plausibilities to every combination, conditional on this
         model and these data. It might help to look at the joint posterior distribution for bl and br:
R code
         post <- extract.samples(m6.1)
   6.5
         plot( bl ~ br , post , col=col.alpha(rangi2,0.1) , pch=16 )


         The resulting plot is shown on the left of Figure 6.2. The posterior distribution for these
         two parameters is very highly correlated, with all of the plausible values of bl and br lying
                                    6.1. MULTICOLLINEARITY                                         165




                                                   6

                                                   5


                                                Density
                                                 3    4
                                                   2

                                                   1

                                                   0
                                                          1.8   1.9      2.0     2.1   2.2   2.3
                                                                      sum of bl and br

        Figure 6.2. Left: Posterior distribution of the association of each leg with
        height, from model m6.1. Since both variables contain almost identical in-
        formation, the posterior is a narrow ridge of negatively correlated values.
        Right: The posterior distribution of the sum of the two parameters is cen-
        tered on the proper association of either leg with height.

along a narrow ridge. When bl is large, then br must be small. What has happened here
is that since both leg variables contain almost exactly the same information, if you insist on
including both in a model, then there will be a practically infinite number of combinations
of bl and br that produce the same predictions.
     One way to think of this phenomenon is that you have approximated this model:
                                    yi ∼ Normal(µi , σ)
                                    µi = α + β1 xi + β2 xi
The variable y is the outcome, like height in the example, and x is a single predictor, like the
leg lengths in the example. Here x is used twice, which is a perfect example of the problem
caused by using both leg lengths. From the golem’s perspective, the model for µi is:
                                    µi = α + (β1 + β2 )xi
All I’ve done is factor xi out of each term. The parameters β1 and β2 cannot be pulled apart,
because they never separately influence the mean µ. Only their sum, β1 +β2 , influences µ. So
this means the posterior distribution ends up reporting the very large range of combinations
of β1 and β2 that make their sum close to the actual association of x with y.
     And the posterior distribution in this simulated example has done exactly that: It has
produced a good estimate of the sum of bl and br. Here’s how you can compute the posterior
distribution of their sum, and then plot it:
                                                                                                         R code
sum_blbr <- post$bl + post$br
                                                                                                         6.6
dens( sum_blbr , col=rangi2 , lwd=2 , xlab="sum of bl and br" )


And the resulting density plot is shown on the right-hand side of Figure 6.2. The posterior
mean is in the right neighborhood, a little over 2, and the standard deviation is much smaller
         166                       6. THE HAUNTED DAG & THE CAUSAL TERROR



         than it is for either component of the sum, bl or br. If you fit a regression with only one of
         the leg length variables, you’ll get approximately the same posterior mean:
R code
         m6.2 <- quap(
   6.7
             alist(
                 height ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
                 mu <- a + bl*leg_left,
                 a ~ dnorm( 10 , 100 ) ,
                 bl ~ dnorm( 2 , 10 ) ,
                 sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
             ) , data=d )
         precis(m6.2)


               mean   sd 5.5% 94.5%
         a     1.00 0.28 0.54 1.45
         bl    1.99 0.06 1.89 2.09
         sigma 0.62 0.04 0.55 0.69

         That 1.99 is almost identical to the mean value of sum_blbr.
             The basic lesson is only this: When two predictor variables are very strongly correlated
         (conditional on other variables in the model), including both in a model may lead to confu-
         sion. The posterior distribution isn’t wrong, in such cases. It’s telling you that the question
         you asked cannot be answered with these data. And that’s a great thing for a model to say,
         that it cannot answer your question. And if you are just interested in prediction, you’ll find
         that this leg model makes fine predictions. It just doesn’t make any claims about which leg
         is more important.
             This leg example is clear and cute. But it is also purely statistical. We aren’t asking any
         serious causal questions here. Let’s try a more causally interesting example next.

         6.1.2. Multicollinear milk. In the leg length example, it’s easy to see that including both legs
         in the model is a little silly. But the problem that arises in real data sets is that we may not
         anticipate a clash between highly correlated predictors. And therefore we may mistakenly
         read the posterior distribution to say that neither predictor is important. In this section, we
         look at an example of this issue with real data.
             Let’s return to the primate milk data from earlier in the chapter:
R code
         library(rethinking)
   6.8
         data(milk)
         d <- milk
         d$K <- standardize( d$kcal.per.g )
         d$F <- standardize( d$perc.fat )
         d$L <- standardize( d$perc.lactose )


         In this example, we are concerned with the perc.fat (percent fat) and perc.lactose (per-
         cent lactose) variables. We’ll use these to model the total energy content, kcal.per.g. The
         code above has already standardized these three variables. You’re going to use these three
         variables to explore a natural case of multicollinearity. Note that there are no missing values,
         NA, in these columns, so there’s no need here to extract complete cases. But you can rest
         assured that quap, unlike reckless functions like lm, would never silently drop cases.
                                    6.1. MULTICOLLINEARITY                                   167



    Start by modeling kcal.per.g as a function of perc.fat and perc.lactose, but in
two bivariate regressions. Look back in Chapter 5 (page 147), for a discussion of these priors.

                                                                                                    R code
# kcal.per.g regressed on perc.fat
                                                                                                    6.9
m6.3 <- quap(
    alist(
        K ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
        mu <- a + bF*F ,
        a ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.2 ) ,
        bF ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
        sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
    ) , data=d )

# kcal.per.g regressed on perc.lactose
m6.4 <- quap(
    alist(
        K ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
        mu <- a + bL*L ,
        a ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.2 ) ,
        bL ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
        sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
    ) , data=d )

precis( m6.3 )
precis( m6.4 )


      mean   sd 5.5% 94.5%
a     0.00 0.08 -0.12 0.12
bF    0.86 0.08 0.73 1.00
sigma 0.45 0.06 0.36 0.54

      mean   sd 5.5% 94.5%
a     0.00 0.07 -0.11 0.11
bL   -0.90 0.07 -1.02 -0.79
sigma 0.38 0.05 0.30 0.46
The posterior distributions for bF and bL are essentially mirror images of one another. The
posterior mean of bF is as positive as the mean of bL is negative. Both are narrow posterior
distributions that lie almost entirely on one side or the other of zero. Given the strong associ-
ation of each predictor with the outcome, we might conclude that both variables are reliable
predictors of total energy in milk, across species. The more fat, the more kilocalories in the
milk. The more lactose, the fewer kilocalories in milk. But watch what happens when we
place both predictor variables in the same regression model:
                                                                                                    R code
m6.5 <- quap(
                                                                                                    6.10
    alist(
        K ~ dnorm( mu , sigma ) ,
        mu <- a + bF*F + bL*L ,
        a ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.2 ) ,
         168                                6. THE HAUNTED DAG & THE CAUSAL TERROR




                                  10   30    50




                                                                 0.5 0.7 0.9
                     kcal.per.g


                                                                               Figure 6.3. A pairs plot of the total en-
               50                                                              ergy, percent fat, and percent lactose vari-
               30                  perc.fat                                    ables from the primate milk data. Percent
               10                                                              fat and percent lactose are strongly nega-
                                                                               tively correlated with one another, provid-
                                                                 70
                                                                               ing mostly the same information.
                                                  perc.lactose   50

                                                                 30
                    0.5 0.7 0.9                   30   50   70




                       bF ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
                       bL ~ dnorm( 0 , 0.5 ) ,
                       sigma ~ dexp( 1 )
             ) ,
             data=d )
         precis( m6.5 )


               mean   sd 5.5% 94.5%
         a     0.00 0.07 -0.11 0.11
         bF    0.24 0.18 -0.05 0.54
         bL   -0.68 0.18 -0.97 -0.38
         sigma 0.38 0.05 0.30 0.46
         Now the posterior means of both bF and bL are closer to zero. And the standard deviations
         for both parameters are twice as large as in the bivariate models (m6.3 and m6.4).
              This is the same statistical phenomenon as in the leg length example. What has happened
         is that the variables perc.fat and perc.lactose contain much of the same information.
         They are almost substitutes for one another. As a result, when you include both in a regres-
         sion, the posterior distribution ends up describing a long ridge of combinations of bF and
         bL that are equally plausible. In the case of the fat and lactose, these two variables form
         essentially a single axis of variation. The easiest way to see this is to use a pairs plot:
R code
         pairs( ~ kcal.per.g + perc.fat + perc.lactose , data=d , col=rangi2 )
 6.11

         I display this plot in Figure 6.3. Along the diagonal, the variables are labeled. In each scat-
         terplot off the diagonal, the vertical axis variable is the variable labeled on the same row and
         the horizontal axis variable is the variable labeled in the same column. For example, the
         two scatterplots in the first row in Figure 6.3 are kcal.per.g (vertical) against perc.fat
         (horizontal) and then kcal.per.g (vertical) against perc.lactose (horizontal). Notice
                                         6.1. MULTICOLLINEARITY                                     169



that percent fat is positively correlated with the outcome, while percent lactose is negatively
correlated with it. Now look at the right-most scatterplot in the middle row. This plot is the
scatter of percent fat (vertical) against percent lactose (horizontal). Notice that the points
line up almost entirely along a straight line. These two variables are negatively correlated,
and so strongly so that they are nearly redundant. Either helps in predicting kcal.per.g,
but neither helps as much once you already know the other.
     In the scientific literature, you might encounter a variety of dodgy ways of coping with
multicollinearity. Few of them take a causal perspective. Some fields actually teach students
to inspect pairwise correlations before fitting a model, to identify and drop highly correlated
predictors. This is a mistake. Pairwise correlations are not the problem. It is the conditional
associations—not correlations—that matter. And even then, the right thing to do will de-
pend upon what is causing the collinearity. The associations within the data alone are not
enough to decide what to do.
     What is likely going on in the milk example is that there is a core tradeoff in milk com-
position that mammal mothers must obey. If a species nurses often, then the milk tends to
be watery and low in energy. Such milk is high in sugar (lactose). If instead a species nurses
rarely, in short bouts, then the milk needs to be higher in energy. Such milk is very high in
fat. This implies a causal model something like this:
                                     L             D              F




                                                   K

The central tradeoff decides how dense, D, the milk needs to be. We haven’t observed this
variable, so it’s shown circled. Then fat, F, and lactose, L, are determined. Finally, the com-
position of F and L determines the kilocalories, K. If we could measure D, or had an evolu-
tionary and economic model to predict it based upon other aspects of a species, that would
be better than stumbling through regressions.
     The problem of multicollinearity is a member of a family of problems with fitting models,
a family sometimes known as non-identifiability. When a parameter is non-identifiable,
it means that the structure of the data and model do not make it possible to estimate the
parameter’s value. Sometimes this problem arises from mistakes in coding a model, but
many important types of models present non-identifiable or weakly identifiable parameters,
even when coded completely correctly. Nature does not owe us easy inference, even when
the model is correct.
     In general, there’s no guarantee that the available data contain much information about
a parameter of interest. When that’s true, your Bayesian machine will return a posterior
distribution very similar to the prior. Comparing the posterior to the prior can therefore
be a good idea, a way of seeing how much information the model extracted from the data.
When the posterior and prior are similar, it doesn’t mean the calculations are wrong—you
got the right answer to the question you asked. But it might lead you to ask a better question.

Rethinking: Identification guaranteed; comprehension up to you. Technically speaking, identifia-
bility is not a concern for Bayesian models. The reason is that as long as the posterior distribution is
proper—which just means that it integrates to 1—then all of the parameters are identified. But this
         170                          6. THE HAUNTED DAG & THE CAUSAL TERROR




         technical fact doesn’t also mean that you can make sense of the posterior distribution. So it’s probably
         better to speak of weakly identified parameters in a Bayesian context. But the difference may be only
         technical. The truth is that even when a DAG says a causal effect should be identifiable, it may not be
         statistically identifiable. We have to work just as hard at the statistics as we do at the design.



         Overthinking: Simulating collinearity. To see how imprecise of the posterior increases with associ-
         ation between two predictors, let’s use a simulation. The code below makes a function that generates
         correlated predictors, fits a model, and returns the standard deviation of the posterior distribution
         for the slope relating perc.fat to kcal.per.g. Then the code repeatedly calls this function, with
         different degrees of correlation as input, and collects the results.
R code
 6.12    library(rethinking)
         data(milk)
         d <- milk
         sim.coll <- function( r=0.9 ) {
             d$x <- rnorm( nrow(d) , mean=r*d$perc.fat ,
                 sd=sqrt( (1-r^2)*var(d$perc.fat) ) )
             m <- lm( kcal.per.g ~ perc.fat + x , data=d )
             sqrt( diag( vcov(m) ) )[2] # stddev of parameter
         }
         rep.sim.coll <- function( r=0.9 , n=100 ) {
             stddev <- replicate( n , sim.coll(r) )
             mean(stddev)
         }
         r.seq <- seq(from=0,to=0.99,by=0.01)
         stddev <- sapply( r.seq , function(z) rep.sim.coll(r=z,n=100) )
         plot( stddev ~ r.seq , type="l" , col=rangi2, lwd=2 , xlab="correlation" )


         So for each correlation value in r.seq, the code generates 100 regressions and returns the average
         standard deviation from them. This code uses implicit flat priors, which are bad priors. So it does
         exaggerate the effect of collinear variables. When you use informative priors, the inflation in standard
         deviation can be much slower.



                                             6.2. Post-treatment bias
              It is routine to worry about mistaken inferences that arise from omitting predictor vari-
         ables. Such mistakes are often called omitted variable bias, and the examples from the
         previous chapter illustrate it. It is much less routine to worry about mistaken inferences
         arising from including variables. But included variable bias is real. Carefully random-
         ized experiments can be ruined just as easily as uncontrolled observational studies. Blindly
         tossing variables into the causal salad is never a good idea.
              Included variable bias takes several forms. The first is post-treatment bias.89 Post-
         treatment bias is a risk in all types of studies. The language “post-treatment” comes in fact
         from thinking about experimental designs. Suppose for example that you are growing some
         plants in a greenhouse. You want to know the difference in growth under different anti-
         fungal soil treatments, because fungus on the plants tends to reduce their growth. Plants are
         initially seeded and sprout. Their heights are measured. Then different soil treatments are
         applied. Final measures are the height of the plant and the presence of fungus. There are
         four variables of interest here: initial height, final height, treatment, and presence of fungus.
                                       6.2. POST-TREATMENT BIAS                                      171



Final height is the outcome of interest. But which of the other variables should be in the
model? If your goal is to make a causal inference about the treatment, you shouldn’t include
the fungus, because it is a post-treatment effect.
     Let’s simulate some data, to make the example more transparent and see what exactly
goes wrong when we include a post-treatment variable.
                                                                                                            R code
set.seed(71)
                                                                                                            6.13
# number of plants
N <- 100

# simulate initial heights
h0 <- rnorm(N,10,2)

# assign treatments and simulate fungus and growth
treatment <- rep( 0:1 , each=N/2 )
fungus <- rbinom( N , size=1 , prob=0.5 - treatment*0.4 )
h1 <- h0 + rnorm(N, 5 - 3*fungus)

# compose a clean data frame
d <- data.frame( h0=h0 , h1=h1 , treatment=treatment , fungus=fungus )
precis(d)


           mean   sd 5.5% 94.5%    histogram
h0         9.96 2.10 6.57 13.08 ▁▂▂▂▇▃▂▃▁▁▁▁
h1        14.40 2.69 10.62 17.93    ▁▁▃▇▇▇▁▁
treatment 0.50 0.50 0.00 1.00     ▇▁▁▁▁▁▁▁▁▇
fungus     0.23 0.42 0.00 1.00    ▇▁▁▁▁▁▁▁▁▂
Now you should have a data frame d with the simulated plant experiment data.

Rethinking: Causal inference heuristics. The danger of post-treatment bias has been known for a
long time. So many scientists have been taught the heuristic that while it is risky to condition on post-
treatment variables, pre-treatment variables are safe. This heuristic may lead to sensible estimates in
many cases. But it is not principled. Pre-treatment variables can also create bias, as you’ll see later
in this chapter. There is nothing wrong, in principle, with heuristics. They are safe in the context for
which they were developed. But we still need principles to know when to deploy them.


6.2.1. A prior is born. When designing the model, it helps to pretend you don’t have the
data generating process just above. In real research, you will not know the real data gener-
ating process. But you will have a lot of scientific information to guide model construction.
So let’s spend some time taking this mock analysis seriously.
    We know that the plants at time t = 1 should be taller than at time t = 0, whatever scale
they are measured on. So if we put the parameters on a scale of proportion of height at time
t = 0, rather than on the absolute scale of the data, we can set the priors more easily. To
make this simpler, let’s focus right now only on the height variables, ignoring the predictor
variables. We might have a linear model like:
                                        h1,i ∼ Normal(µi , σ)
                                         µi = h0,i × p
